
 Brain tumor - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A brain tumor is a group (mass) of abnormal cells that start in the brain.  This article focuses on primary brain tumors in children. Causes 
 
 The cause of primary brain tumors is unknown. Primary brain tumors may be: Not cancerous (benign) Invasive (spread to nearby areas) Cancerous (malignant)  Brain tumors are classified based on: The exact site of the tumor The type of tissue involved Whether it is cancerous  Brain tumors can directly destroy brain cells. They can also indirectly damage cells by pushing on other parts of the brain. This leads to swelling and increased pressure inside the skull. Tumors can occur at any age. Many tumors are more common at a certain age. In general, brain tumors in children are very rare. COMMON TUMOR TYPES Astrocytomas are usually noncancerous, slow-growing tumors. They commonly develop in children ages 5 to 8. Also called low-grade gliomas, these are the most common brain tumors in children. Medulloblastomas are the most common type of childhood brain cancer. Most medulloblastomas occur before age 10. Ependymomas are a type of childhood brain tumor that can be benign (noncancerous) or malignant (cancerous). The location and type of ependymoma determine the type of therapy needed to control the tumor. Brainstem gliomas are very rare tumors that occur almost only in children. The average age at which they develop is about 6. The tumor may grow very large before causing symptoms. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may be subtle and only gradually become worse, or they may occur very quickly. Headaches are often the most common symptom. But only very rarely do children with headaches have a tumor. Headache patterns that may occur with brain tumors include: Headaches that are worse when waking up in the morning and go away within a few hours Headaches that get worse with coughing or exercise, or with a change in body position Headaches that occur while sleeping and with at least one other symptom such as vomiting or confusion  Sometimes, the only symptoms of brain tumors are mental changes, which may include: Changes in personality and behavior Unable to concentrate Increased sleep Memory loss Problems with reasoning  Other possible symptoms are: Gradual loss of movement or feeling in an arm or leg Hearing loss with or without dizziness Speech difficulty Unexpected vision problem (especially if it occurs with a headache), including vision loss (usually of peripheral vision) in one or both eyes, or double vision Problems with balance Weakness or numbness  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Infants may have the following physical signs: Bulging fontanelle Enlarged eyes No red reflex in the eye Positive  Babinski reflex Separated sutures  The following tests may be used to detect a brain tumor and identify its location: CT scan of the head MRI of the brain Examination of the cerebral spinal fluid  (CSF)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the size and type of tumor and the child's general health. The goals of treatment may be to cure the tumor, relieve symptoms, and improve brain function or the child's comfort. Surgery is needed for most primary brain tumors. Some tumors may be completely removed. In cases where the tumor cannot be removed, surgery may help reduce pressure and relieve symptoms.  Chemotherapy  or radiation therapy may be used for certain tumors. The following are treatments for specific types of tumors: Astrocytoma: Surgery to remove the tumor is the main treatment. Chemotherapy or  radiation therapy  may also be necessary. Brainstem gliomas: Surgery is usually not possible because of the tumor's location deep in the brain. Radiation is used to shrink the tumor and prolong life. Ependymomas: Treatment includes surgery. Radiation and chemotherapy may be necessary. Medulloblastomas: Surgery alone does not cure this type of tumor. Chemotherapy with or without radiation is often used in combination with surgery.  Medicines used to treat primary brain tumors in children include: Corticosteroids to reduce brain swelling Diuretics (water pills) to reduce brain swelling and pressure Anticonvulsants to reduce or prevent seizures Pain medicines  Comfort measures, safety measures, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and other such steps may be required to improve quality of life. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you and your child feel less alone.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the child does depends on many things, including the exact type of tumor. In general, about 3 out of 4 children survive at least 5 years after being diagnosed. Long-term brain and nervous system problems may result from the tumor itself or from treatment. Children may have problems with attention, concentration, or memory. They may also have problems processing information, planning, insight, or initiative or desire to do things. Children younger than age 7, especially younger than age 3, seem to be at greatest risk of these complications.  Parents need to make sure that children receive support services at home and at school. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call a provider if a child develops headaches that do not go away or other symptoms of a brain tumor. Go to the emergency room if a child develops any of the following: Physical weakness Change in behavior Severe headache of unknown cause Seizure of unknown cause Vision changes Speech changes  Alternative Names 
 
 Glioblastoma multiforme - children; Ependymoma - children; Glioma - children; Astrocytoma - children; Medulloblastoma - children; Neuroglioma - children; Oligodendroglioma - children; Meningioma - children; Cancer - brain tumor (children) Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 Primary brain tumor 
 References 
 
 Ater JL, Kuttesch JF. Brain tumors in childhood. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 497. Kieran MW, Chi SN, Manley PE, et al. Tumors of the brain and spinal cord. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, Look AT, Lux SE, Nathan DG, eds.  Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 57. National Cancer Institute: PDQ Childhood Brain and Spinal Cord Tumors Treatment Overview. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified June 24, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childbrain/healthprofessional . Accessed October 9, 2015. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Brain herniation 
 Brain surgery 
 Brain tumor - primary - adults 
 Central nervous system 
 Chemotherapy 
 Endocrine glands 
 Fatigue 
 Headache 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 Invasive 
 Malignancy 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Proton therapy 
 Radiation therapy 
 Tumor 
 Vision problems 
 Walking abnormalities 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain radiation - discharge 
 Brain surgery - discharge 
 Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 9/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Adam S. Levy, MD, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Childhood Brain Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia