
 Brain abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A brain abscess is a collection of pus, immune cells, and other material in the brain, usually from a bacterial or fungal infection. Causes 
 
 Brain abscesses commonly occur when bacteria or fungi infect part of the brain. As a result, swelling and irritation (inflammation) develop. Infected brain cells, white blood cells, live and dead bacteria, or fungi collect in an area of the brain. Tissue forms around this area and creates a mass, or abscess. The germs that cause a brain abscess can reach the brain through the blood. Or, they enter the brain directly, such as during brain surgery. The source of the infection is often not found. However, the most common source is a lung infection. Less often, a heart infection is the cause.  The following raise your chance of developing a brain abscess: A weakened immune system (such as in  AIDS  patients) Chronic disease, such as cancer Drugs that suppress the immune system (corticosteroids or  chemotherapy ) Congenital heart disease Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may develop slowly, over a period of 2 weeks, or they may develop suddenly. They may include: Changes in mental status , such as confusion, slow response or thinking, unable to focus, or sleepiness Decreased ability to feel sensation Fever and chills Headache,  seizures , or stiff neck Language problems Loss of muscle function, typically on one side Vision changes Vomiting Weakness  Exams and Tests 
 
 A brain and nervous system (neurological) exam will usually show signs of  increased intracranial pressure  and problems with brain function. Tests to diagnose a brain abscess may include: Blood cultures Chest x-ray Complete blood count ( CBC ) Head CT scan Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) MRI of head Testing for the presence of  antibodies  to certain germs  A needle  biopsy  is usually performed to identify the cause of the infection. Treatment 
 
 A brain abscess is a medical emergency. Pressure inside the skull may become high enough to be life threatening. You will need to stay in the hospital until the condition is stable. Some people may need life support. Medicine, not surgery, is recommended if you have: A small abscess (less than 2 cm) An abscess deep in the brain An abscess and  meningitis Several abscesses (rare) Shunts in the brain for  hydrocephalus  (in some cases the shunt may need to be removed temporarily or replaced) An infection called  toxoplasmosis  in a person with HIV  You may be prescribed several different types of antibiotics to make sure treatment works. Antifungal medicines may also be prescribed if the infection is likely caused by a fungus. Surgery is needed if : Increased pressure in the brain continues or gets worse The brain abscess does not get smaller after medicine The brain abscess contains gas (produced by some types of bacteria) The brain abscess might break open (rupture)  Surgery consists of opening the skull, exposing the brain, and draining the abscess. Laboratory tests are often done to examine the fluid. This helps identify the cause of the infection, so that the right antibiotics or antifungal medicine can be prescribed. Needle  aspiration  guided by CT or MRI scan may be needed for a deep abscess. During this procedure, medicines may be injected directly into the mass. Certain diuretics (water pills) and steroids may also be used to reduce the swelling of the brain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If untreated, a brain abscess is almost always deadly. With treatment, the death rate is about 10 to 30%. The earlier treatment is received, the better. Some people may have long-term nervous system problems after surgery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain damage Meningitis that is severe and life threatening Return (recurrence) of infection Seizures  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to a hospital emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of a brain abscess. Prevention 
 
 You can reduce the risk of developing a brain abscess by getting treated for infections or health problems that can cause them.  Some people, including those with certain heart disorders, may receive antibiotics before dental or other procedures to help reduce the risk of infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Abscess - brain; Cerebral abscess; CNS abscess Images 
 
 
 Amebic brain abscess 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Tunkel AR. Brain abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 92. Tunkel AR, Scheld WM. Brain abscess. In: Winn HR, ed.  Youman's Neurological Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Headache 
 Seizures 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Weakness 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain surgery - discharge 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Brain Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia