
 Central sleep apnea 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Central sleep apnea is a  sleep disorder  in which breathing stops over and over during sleep.
 Causes 
 
 Central sleep apnea results when the brain temporarily stops sending signals to the muscles that control breathing.  The condition often occurs in people who have certain medical problems. For example, it can develop in someone who has a problem with the brainstem, which controls breathing. Conditions that can cause or lead to central sleep apnea include: Problems that affect the brainstem, including brain infection, stroke, or conditions of the cervical spine (neck) Severe obesity Certain medicines, such as  narcotic painkillers If the apnea is not associated with another disease, it is called idiopathic central sleep apnea. A condition called Cheyne-Stokes respiration can affect people with severe heart failure and can be associated with central sleep apnea. The breathing pattern involves alternating deep and heavy breathing with shallow, or even no breathing, usually while sleeping. Central sleep apnea is not the same as  obstructive sleep apnea . With obstructive sleep apnea, breathing stops and starts because the airway is narrowed or blocked. But a person can have both conditions, such as with a medical problem called  obesity hypoventilation syndrome .  Symptoms 
 
 People with central sleep apnea have episodes of disrupted breathing during sleep. Other symptoms may include: Chronic fatigue Daytime sleepiness Morning headaches Restless sleep Other symptoms may occur if the apnea is due to a problem with the nervous system. Symptoms depend on the parts of the nervous system that are affected, and may include: Shortness of breath Swallowing problems Voice changes Weakness or numbness throughout the body Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests will be done to diagnose an underlying medical condition. A  sleep study (polysomnography)  can confirm sleep apnea. Other tests that may be done include: Echocardiogram Lung function  testing MRI  of the spine or neck Treatment 
 
 Treating the condition that is causing central sleep apnea can help manage symptoms. For example, if central sleep apnea is due to heart failure, the goal is to treat the heart failure itself. Devices used during sleep to aid breathing may be recommended. These include  nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ,  bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP)  or adaptive servo-ventilation (ASV). Some types of central sleep apnea are treated with medicines that stimulate breathing. Oxygen treatment may help ensure the lungs get enough oxygen while sleeping. If narcotic medicine is causing the apnea, the dosage may need to be lowered or the medicine changed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a patient does depends on the medical condition causing central sleep apnea. The outlook is usually favorable for persons with idiopathic central sleep apnea. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may result from the underlying disease causing the central sleep apnea. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of sleep apnea. Central sleep apnea is usually diagnosed in people who are already severely ill. Alternative Names 
 
 Sleep apnea - central References 
 
 Aurora RN, Chowdhuri S, Ramar K, et al. The treatment of central sleep apnea syndromes in adults: practice parameters with an evidence-based literature review and meta-analyses.  SLEEP . 2012;35:17-40. Clodagh MR, Bradley TD. Central sleep apnea. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Encephalitis 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 8/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutger's New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Apnea 
 Browse the Encyclopedia