
 Cerebral angiography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cerebral angiography is a procedure that uses a special dye (contrast material) and x-rays to see how blood flows through the brain. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Cerebral angiography is done in the hospital or radiology center.  You lie on an x-ray table. Your head is held still using a strap, tape, or sandbags, so you DO NOT move it during the procedure. Before the test starts, you are given a mild sedative to help you relax. An  electrocardiogram  (ECG) monitors your heart activity during the test. Sticky patches, called leads, will be placed on your arms and legs. Wires connect the leads to the ECG machine.  An area of your body, usually the groin, is cleaned and numbed with a local numbing medicine (anesthetic). A thin, hollow tube called a catheter is placed through an artery. The catheter is carefully moved up through the main blood vessels in the belly area and chest into an artery in the neck. X-rays help the doctor guide the catheter to the correct position.  Once the catheter is in place, the dye is sent through the catheter. X-ray images are taken to see how the dye moves through the artery and blood vessels of the brain. The dye helps highlight any blockages in blood flow. Sometimes, a computer removes the bones and tissues on the images being viewed, so that only the blood vessels filled with the dye are seen. This is called digital subtraction angiography (DSA). After the x-rays are taken, the catheter is withdrawn. Pressure is applied on the leg at the site of insertion for 10 to 15 minutes to stop the bleeding or a device is used to close the tiny hole. A tight bandage is then applied. Your leg should be kept straight for 2 to 6 hours after the procedure. Watch the area for bleeding for at least the next 12 hours. In rare cases, a wrist artery is used instead of the groin artery. Angiography with a catheter is used less often now. This is because MRA ( magnetic resonance angiography ) and  CT angiography  give clearer images. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Before the procedure, your provider will examine you and order blood tests.  Tell the provider if you: Have a history of bleeding problems or take medicines that are blood thinners Have had an allergic reaction to x-ray contrast dye or any iodine substance May be pregnant Have kidney function problems  You may be told not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 8 hours before the test. When you arrive at the testing site, you will be given a hospital gown to wear. You must remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-ray table may feel hard and cold. You may ask for a blanket or pillow. Some people feel a sting when the numbing medicine (anesthetic) is given. You will feel a brief, sharp pain and pressure as the catheter is moved into the body. The contrast may cause a warm or burning feeling of the skin of the face or head. This is normal and usually goes away within a few seconds. You may have slight tenderness and bruising at the site of the injection after the test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Cerebral angiography is most often used to identify or confirm problems with the blood vessels in the brain. Your provider may order this test if you have symptoms or signs of: Abnormal blood vessels (vascular malformation) Aneurysm Narrowing of the arteries in the brain Vasculitis  It is sometimes used to: Look at blood flow to a tumor Evaluate the arteries of the head and neck before surgery Find a clot that may have caused a  stroke In some cases, this procedure may be used to get more detailed information after something abnormal has been detected by an MRI or  CT scan of the head . This test may also be done in preparation for medical treatment ( interventional radiology procedures ) by way of certain blood vessels. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Contrast dye flowing out of the blood vessel may be a sign of bleeding. Narrowed arteries may suggest:  Cholesterol deposits A spasm of a brain artery Inherited disorders  Out of place blood vessels may be due to:  Brain tumors Bleeding within the skull Bulging of a blood vessel in the brain ( aneurysm ) Abnormal connection between the arteries and veins in the brain ( arteriovenous malformation )  Abnormal results may also be due to: Cancer that started in another part of the body and has spread to the brain ( metastatic brain tumor ) Syphilis infection of the brain ( neurosyphilis )  Risks 
 
 Complications may include: Allergic reaction to the contrast dye Blood clot or bleeding where the catheter is inserted, which could partly block blood flow to the leg Damage to an artery or artery wall from the catheter, which can block blood flow and cause a stroke (rare) Damage to the kidneys from the IV contrast Considerations 
 
 Tell your provider right away if you have: Weakness in your face muscles Numbness in your leg during or after the procedure Slurred speech during or after the procedure Vision problems during or after the procedure  Alternative Names 
 
 Vertebral angiogram; Angiography - head; Carotid angiogram; Cervicocerebral catheter-based angiography; Intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography; IADSA Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 Carotid stenosis, x-ray of the left artery 
 Carotid stenosis, x-ray of the right artery 
 References 
 
 Adamczyk P, Liebeskind DS. Vascular imaging: computed tomographic angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, and ultrasound. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 40. Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. C. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:266-432. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 Blood clots 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
 Head CT scan 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 Neurosyphilis 
 Optic glioma 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Stroke 
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis 
 Tumor 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arteriovenous Malformations 
 Brain Aneurysm 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Vasculitis 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia