
 Cranial mononeuropathy III 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cranial mononeuropathy III is a nerve disorder. It affects the function of the third cranial nerve. As a result, the person may have double vision and eyelid drooping. Causes 
 
 Mononeuropathy  means that only one nerve is affected. This disorder affects the third cranial nerve in the skull. This is one of the cranial nerves that control eye movement. Causes may include: Brain aneurysm Infections Abnormal blood vessels (vascular malformations) Sinus thrombosis Tissue damage from loss of blood flow (infarction) Trauma (from head injury or caused accidentally during surgery) Tumors or other growths (especially tumors at the base of the brain and pituitary gland) In rare cases, people with  migraine  headaches have a temporary problem with the oculomotor nerve. This is probably due to a spasm of the blood vessels. In some cases, no cause can be found. People with diabetes may also develop  a neuropathy of the third nerve . Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Double vision , which is the most common symptom Drooping of one eyelid (ptosis) Enlarged pupil that does not get smaller when a light shines on it Headache or eye pain  Other symptoms may occur if the cause is a tumor or swelling of the brain. Decreasing alertness is serious, because it could be a sign of brain damage or impending death. Exams and Tests 
 
 An eye examination may show: Enlarged (dilated) pupil of the affected eye Eye movement abnormalities Eyes that are not aligned  Your health care provider will do a complete examination to find out if other parts of the nervous system are affected. Depending on the suspected cause, you may need: Blood tests Tests to look at blood vessels to the brain ( cerebral angiogram , CT angiogram, or  MR angiogram ) MRI  or  CT scan of the brain Spinal tap  (lumbar puncture)  You may need to be referred to a doctor who specializes in vision problems related to the nervous system (neuro-ophthalmologist). Treatment 
 
 Some people get better without treatment. Treating the cause (if it can be found) may relieve the symptoms. Other treatments to relieve symptoms may include: Corticosteroid medicines to reduce swelling and relieve pressure on the nerve (when caused by a tumor or injury) Eye patch or glasses with prisms to reduce double vision Pain medicines Surgery to treat eyelid drooping or eyes that are not aligned  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some people will respond to treatment. In a few others, permanent eye drooping or loss of eye movement will occur. Causes such as brain swelling due to a tumor or stroke, or a brain aneurysm may be life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have double vision and it does not go away in a few minutes, especially if you also have eyelid drooping. Prevention 
 
 Quickly treating disorders that could press on the nerve may reduce the risk of developing cranial mononeuropathy III. Alternative Names 
 
 Third cranial nerve palsy; Oculomotor palsy; Pupil-involving third cranial nerve palsy; Mononeuropathy - compression type Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Rucker JC, Thurtell MJ. Cranial neuropathies. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 104. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Migraine 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Ptosis - infants and children 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia