
 Cranial mononeuropathy VI 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cranial mononeuropathy VI is a nerve disorder. It affects the function of the sixth cranial (skull) nerve. As a result, the person may have double vision. Causes 
 
 Cranial mononeuropathy VI is damage to the sixth cranial nerve. This nerve is also called the abducens nerve. It helps you move your eye sideways toward your temple. Disorders of this nerve can occur with: Brain  aneurysms 
   Nerve damage from diabetes( diabetic neuropathy ) Gradenigo syndrome (which also causes discharge from the ear and eye pain) Tolosa-Hunt syndrome, inflammation of the area behind the eye Increased or decreased pressure in the skull Infections (such as  meningitis  or  sinusitis ) Multiple sclerosis ( MS ), a disease that affects the brain and spinal cord Pregnancy Stroke Trauma (caused by head injury or accidentally during surgery) Tumors around or behind the eye  In some people, there is no clear cause. Because there are common nerve pathways through the skull, the same disorder that damages the sixth cranial nerve may affect other cranial nerves (such as the third or fourth cranial nerve). Symptoms 
 
 When the sixth cranial nerve doesn't work properly, you can't turn your eye outward toward your ear. You can still move your eye up, down, and toward the nose, unless other nerves are affected. Symptoms may include: Double vision  when looking to one side Headaches Pain around the eye  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests often show that one eye has trouble looking to the side while the other eye moves normally. An examination shows the eyes do not line up either at rest or when looking in the direction of the weak eye. Your health care provider will do a complete examination to determine the possible effect on other parts of the nervous system. Depending on the suspected cause, you may need: Blood tests Head imaging study (such as an  MRI  or  CT scan ) Spinal tap  (lumbar puncture)  You may need to be referred to a doctor who specializes in vision problems related to the nervous system (neuro-ophthalmologist). Treatment 
 
 If your provider diagnoses swelling or inflammation of, or around the nerve, medicines called corticosteroids may be used. Sometimes, the condition disappears without treatment. If you have diabetes, you'll be advised to keep tight control of your  blood sugar level . The provider may prescribe an eye patch to relieve the double vision. The patch can be removed after the nerve heals. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treating the cause may improve the condition. Even when no cause is found, recovery is usually complete. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include permanent vision changes. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have double vision. Prevention 
 
 There is no way to prevent this condition. People with diabetes may reduce the risk by controlling their blood sugar. Alternative Names 
 
 Abducens paralysis; Abducens palsy; Lateral rectus palsy; VIth nerve palsy; Cranial nerve VI palsy; Sixth nerve palsy; Neuropathy - sixth nerve Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Azarmina M, Azarmina H. The six syndromes of the sixth cranial nerve.  J Ophthalmic Vis Res . 2013;8(2):160-171. PMCID: PMC3740468  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3740468 . Rucker JC, Thurtell MJ. Cranial neuropathies. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 104. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 Mononeuropathy 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia