
 Focal neurological deficits 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A focal  neurologic deficit  is a problem with nerve, spinal cord, or brain function. It affects a specific location, such as the left side of the face, right arm, or even a small area such as the tongue. Speech, vision, and hearing problems are also considered focal neurological deficits. The type, location, and severity of the problem can indicate which area of the brain or nervous system is affected. In contrast, a nonfocal problem is NOT specific to a certain area of the brain. It may include a general  loss of consciousness  or emotional problem. Considerations 
 
 A focal neurologic problem can affect any of these functions: Movement changes, including paralysis,  weakness , loss of muscle control, increased muscle tone,  loss of muscle tone , or movements a person cannot control (involuntary movements, such as tremor) Sensation changes, including  paresthesia  (abnormal sensations), numbness, or decreases in sensation  Other examples of focal loss of function include: Horner syndrome : small pupil on one side, one-sided  eyelid drooping , lack of sweating on one side of the face, and sinking of one eye into its socket Not paying attention to a person's surroundings or a part of the body (neglect) Loss of coordination  or loss of  fine motor control  (ability to perform complex movements) Poor gag reflex, swallowing difficulty, and frequent choking Speech or language difficulties, such as aphasia (a problem understanding or producing words) or dysarthria (a problem making the sounds of words), poor enunciation, poor understanding of speech, difficulty writing, lack of ability to read or understand writing, inability to name objects (anomia) Vision changes, such as reduced vision, decreased  visual field , sudden  vision loss , double vision (diplopia)  Causes 
 
 Anything that damages or disrupts any part of the nervous system can cause a focal neurologic deficit. Examples include: Abnormal blood vessels (vascular malformation) Brain tumor Cerebral palsy Degenerative nerve illness Disorders of a single nerve or nerve group (for example,  carpal tunnel syndrome ) Infection Injury Stroke Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on the type and cause of the problem. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have any loss of movement, sensation, or function, call your health care provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will take your medical history and perform a physical examination. The physical examination will include a detailed examination of your nervous system function. Which tests are done depends on your other symptoms and the possible cause of the nerve function loss. The tests that are used try to locate the part of the nervous system that is involved. Common examples are: CT scan  of the back, neck, or head Electromyogram  (EMG)/ nerve conduction velocities  (NCV) MRI  of the back, neck, or head Spinal tap Alternative Names 
 
 Neurological deficits - focal Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC. Diagnosis of neurological disease. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 1. Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Textbook of Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap.403. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Fine motor control 
 Horner syndrome 
 Hypotonia 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Muscle function loss 
 Neurologic deficit 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Ptosis - infants and children 
 Vision problems 
 Visual field 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 12/15/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, M.D., Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neurologic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia