
 Kyphosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Kyphosis is a curving of the spine that causes a bowing or rounding of the back. This leads to a hunchback or slouching posture. Causes 
 
 Kyphosis can occur at any age, although it is rare at birth. A type of kyphosis that occurs in young teens is known as Scheuermann disease. It is caused by the wedging together of several bones of the spine (vertebrae) in a row. The cause of this condition is unknown. In adults, kyphosis can be caused by: Degenerative diseases of the spine (such as  arthritis  or disk degeneration) Fractures caused by  osteoporosis  (osteoporotic compression fractures) Injury (trauma) Slipping of one vertebra forward on another ( spondylolisthesis ) Other causes of kyphosis include: Certain hormone ( endocrine ) diseases Connective tissue disorders Infection (such as  tuberculosis ) Muscular dystrophy  (group of inherited disorders that cause muscle weakness and loss of muscle tissue) Neurofibromatosis  (disorder in which nerve tissue tumors form) Paget disease  (disorder that involves abnormal bone destruction and regrowth) Polio Scoliosis  (curving of the spine often looks like a C or S) Spina bifida  (birth defect in which the backbone and spinal canal don't close before birth) Tumors Symptoms 
 
 Pain in the middle or lower back is the most common symptom. Other symptoms may include any of the following: Difficulty breathing (in severe cases) Fatigue Round back appearance Tenderness and stiffness in the spine  Exams and Tests 
 
 Physical examination  by a health care provider confirms the abnormal curve of the spine. The provider will also look for any nervous system (neurological) changes. These include weakness, paralysis, or changes in sensation below the curve. Tests that may be ordered include: Spine x-ray Pulmonary function tests  (if kyphosis affects breathing) MRI  (if there may be a tumor, infection, or nervous system symptoms) Bone density test (if there may be osteoporosis) Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder: Congenital kyphosis needs corrective surgery at an early age. Scheuermann disease is treated with a brace and physical therapy. Sometimes surgery is needed for large (greater than 60 degrees), painful curves. Compression fractures  from osteoporosis can be left alone if there are no nervous system problems or pain. But the osteoporosis needs to be treated to help prevent future fractures. For severe deformity or pain from osteoporosis, surgery is an option. Kyphosis caused by infection or tumor needs prompt treatment, often with surgery and medicines. Treatment for other types of kyphosis depends on the cause. Surgery is needed if nervous system symptoms or constant pain develop. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Young teens with Scheuermann disease tend to do well, even if they need surgery. The disease stops once they stop growing. If the kyphosis is due to  degenerative joint disease  or multiple compression fractures, surgery is needed to correct the defect and improve pain. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated kyphosis can cause any of the following: Decreased lung capacity Disabling back pain Nervous system symptoms, including leg weakness or paralysis Round back deformity  Prevention 
 
 Treating and preventing osteoporosis can prevent many cases of kyphosis in older adults. Early diagnosis and bracing for Scheuermann disease can reduce the need for surgery, but there is no way to prevent the disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Scheuermann disease; Roundback; Hunchback; Postural kyphosis; Neck pain - kyphosis Images 
 
 
 Skeletal spine 
 Kyphosis 
 References 
 
 Johnston CE. Kyphosis. In: Herring JA, ed.  Tachdjian's Pediatric Orthopaedics . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 13. Magee DJ. Thoracic (dorsal) spine. In: Magee DJ, ed.  Orthopedic Physical Assessment . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 8. Warner WC, Sawyer JR, Kelly DM. Scoliosis and kyphosis. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Endocrine glands 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Neurofibromatosis-1 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Paget disease of the bone 
 Polio 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Spondylolisthesis 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia