
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A metastatic brain tumor is cancer that started in another part of the body and has spread to the brain. Causes 
 
 Many tumor or cancer types can spread to the brain. The most common are:  Bladder cancer Breast cancer Germ cell tumors, such as  Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor Kidney cancer Leukemia Lung cancer Melanoma Some types of cancer rarely spread to the brain, such as colon cancer and prostate cancer. In other rare cases, a tumor can spread to the brain from an unknown location. This is called cancer of unknown primary (CUP) origin. Growing  brain tumors  can place pressure on nearby parts of the brain. Brain swelling due to these tumors also causes increased  pressure within the skull . Brain tumors that spread are classified based on the location of the tumor in the brain, the type of tissue involved, the original location of the tumor, and other factors. In rare cases, doctors do not know the original location. This is called cancer of unknown primary (CUP) origin. Metastatic brain tumors occur in about one fourth (25%) of all cancers that spread through the body. They are much more common than  primary brain tumors  (tumors that start in the brain). Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Decreased coordination , clumsiness, falls Fever  (sometimes) General ill feeling  or  fatigue Headache , new or more severe than usual Memory loss, poor judgment, difficulty solving problems Numbness, tingling, pain, and other changes in sensation Personality changes Rapid emotional changes or strange behaviors Seizures  that are new Problems with speech Vision changes , double vision, decreased vision Vomiting , with or without nausea Weakness of a body area  Specific symptoms vary. Common symptoms of most types of metastatic brain tumors are caused by increased pressure in the brain. Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam can show brain and nervous system changes based on where the tumor is in the brain. Signs of increased pressure in the skull are also common. Some tumors may not show signs until they are very large. Then, they can cause a very quick decline in nervous system function. The original (primary) tumor may be found by examining tumor tissues from the brain. Tests may include: Chest x-ray ,  mammogram ,  CT scans  of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to find the original tumor site CT scan or  MRI of the brain  to confirm the diagnosis and identify the tumor location (MRI is usually more sensitive for finding tumors in the brain) Examination of tissue removed from the tumor during surgery or CT scan-guided  biopsy  to confirm the type of tumor Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the size and type of the tumor, from where in the body it spread, and the person's general health. The goals of treatment may be to relieve symptoms, improve functioning, or provide comfort. Radiation  to the whole brain is often used to treat tumors that have spread to the brain, especially if there are many tumors. Surgery may be used when there is a single tumor and the cancer has not spread to other parts of the body. Some tumors may be completely removed. Tumors that are deep or that extend into brain tissue may be reduced in size (debulked). Surgery may reduce pressure and relieve symptoms in cases when the tumor cannot be removed. Chemotherapy for metastatic brain tumors is usually not as helpful as surgery or radiation. Some types of tumors, though, do respond to chemotherapy. Stereotactic radiosurgery  may also be used. This form of radiation therapy focuses high-power x-rays on a small area of the brain. It is used when there are only a few tumors. Medicines for brain tumor symptoms include: Antacids or antihistamines to control stress ulcers Anticonvulsants such as phenytoin or levetiracetam to reduce or prevent seizures Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone to reduce brain swelling Osmotic diuretics such as urea or mannitol to reduce brain swelling Pain medicines  When the cancer has spread, treatment may focus on relieving pain and other symptoms. This is called  palliative  or supportive care. Comfort measures, safety measures, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and other treatments may improve the patient's quality of life. Some people may want to seek legal advice to help them create an  advance directive  and power of attorney for health care. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 For many people with metastatic brain tumors, the cancer is not curable. It will eventually spread to other areas of the body. Prognosis depends on the type of tumor and how it responds to treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result include: Brain herniation (fatal) Loss of ability to function or care for self Loss of ability to interact Permanent, severe loss of nervous system function that gets worse over time When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop a persistent headache that is new or different for you. Call your provider or go to the emergency room if you or someone you know suddenly becomes sluggish or has vision changes, or speech impairment, or has  seizures  that are new or different. Alternative Names 
 
 Brain tumor - metastatic (secondary); Cancer - brain tumor (metastatic) Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Dorsey JF, Hollander AB, Alonso-Basanta M, et al. Cancer of the central nervous system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, et al, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 66. Ferri FF. Brain metastases. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:240-241. National Cancer Institute: PDQ adult brain tumors treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified: January 27, 2016.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/adultbrain/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: central nervous system cancers. Version 1.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cns.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Brain herniation 
 Brain surgery 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Breast cancer 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Melanoma 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain radiation - discharge 
 Brain surgery - discharge 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia