
 Multiple sclerosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Multiple sclerosis is an  autoimmune disease  that affects the brain and spinal cord ( central nervous system ). Causes 
 
 Multiple sclerosis (MS) affects women more than men. The disorder is most commonly diagnosed between ages 20 to 40, but it can be seen at any age. MS is caused by damage to the myelin sheath. This sheath is the protective covering that surrounds nerve cells. When this nerve covering is damaged, nerve signals slow or stop. The nerve damage is caused by inflammation. Inflammation occurs when the body's own immune cells attack the nervous system. This can occur along any area of the brain, optic nerve, and spinal cord. It is unknown what exactly causes MS. The most common thought is that a virus or gene defect, or both, are to blame. Environmental factors may also play a role. You are slightly more likely to develop this condition if you have a family history of MS or you live in a part of the world where MS is more common. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary because the location and severity of each attack can be different. Attacks can last for days, weeks, or months. Attacks are followed by remissions. These are periods of reduced or no symptoms. Fever, hot baths, sun exposure, and stress can trigger or worsen attacks. It is common for the disease to return (relapse). The disease may also continue to get worse without remissions. Nerves in any part of the brain or spinal cord may be damaged. Because of this, MS symptoms can appear in many parts of the body. Muscle symptoms: Loss of balance Muscle spasms Numbness  or abnormal sensation in any area Problems moving arms or legs Problems walking Problems with  coordination  and making small movements Tremor  in one or more arms or legs Weakness  in one or more arms or legs  Bowel and bladder symptoms: Constipation  and stool leakage Difficulty beginning to urinate Frequent need to urinate Strong urge to urinate Urine leakage ( incontinence )  Eye symptoms: Double vision Eye discomfort Uncontrollable eye movements Vision loss  (usually affects one eye at a time)  Numbness, tingling, or pain: Facial pain Painful  muscle spasms Tingling, crawling, or burning feeling in the arms and legs  Other brain and nerve symptoms: Decreased attention span, poor judgment, and memory loss Difficulty reasoning and solving problems Depression  or feelings of sadness Dizziness  and balance problems Hearing loss Sexual symptoms: Problems with erections Problems with vaginal lubrication  Speech and swallowing symptoms: Slurred or difficult-to-understand speech Trouble chewing and swallowing  Fatigue  is a common and bothersome symptom as MS progresses. It is often worse in the late afternoon. Exams and Tests 
 
 Symptoms of MS may mimic those of many other nervous system problems. MS is diagnosed by determining if there are signs of more than one attack on the brain or spinal cord and by ruling out other conditions. People who have a form of MS called relapsing-remitting have a history of at least two attacks separated by a remission. In other people, the disease may slowly get worse in between clear attacks. This form is called secondary progressive MS. A form with gradual progression, but no clear attacks is called primary progressive MS. The health care provider may suspect MS if there are decreases in the function of two different parts of the central nervous system (such as abnormal reflexes) at two different times. An exam of the nervous system may show reduced nerve function in one area of the body. Or the reduced nerve function may be spread over many parts of the body. This may include: Abnormal nerve reflexes Decreased ability to move a part of the body Decreased or abnormal sensation Other loss of nervous system functions, such as vision  An eye exam may show: Abnormal pupil responses Changes in the  visual fields  or eye movements Decreased visual acuity Problems with the inside parts of the eye Rapid eye movements triggered when the eye moves  Tests to diagnose MS include: Blood tests to rule out other conditions that are similar to MS Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests, including CSF oligoclonal banding MRI scan of the brain  and MRI scan of the spine are important to help diagnose and follow MS Nerve function study (evoked potential test, such as  brainstem auditory evoked response )  Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for MS at this time. But, there are treatments that may slow the disease. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms and help you maintain a normal quality of life. Medicines are often taken long-term. These include: Medicines to slow the disease Steroids to decrease the severity of attacks Medicines to control symptoms such as muscle spasms, urinary problems, fatigue, or mood problems  Medicines are more effective for the relapsing-remitting form than for other forms of MS. The following may also be  helpful for people with MS : Physical therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy, and support groups Assistive devices, such as wheelchairs, bed lifts, shower chairs, walkers, and wall bars A planned exercise program early in the course of the disorder A healthy lifestyle, with good nutrition and enough rest and relaxation Avoiding fatigue, stress, temperature extremes, and illness Changes in  what you eat or drink if there are swallowing problems Making changes around the home to  prevent falls Social workers or other counseling services to help you cope with the disorder and get assistance Vitamin D or other supplements (talk to your provider first) Complementary and alternative approaches, such as acupressure or cannabis, to help with muscle problems  Support Groups 
 
 Living with MS may be a challenge. You can ease the stress of illness by joining an  MS support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies, and is hard to predict. Although the disorder is life-long ( chronic ) and incurable, life expectancy can be normal or almost normal. Most people with MS are active and function at work with little disability. Those who usually have the best outlook are: Females People who were young (less than 30 years old) when the disease started People with infrequent attacks People with a relapsing-remitting pattern People who have limited disease on imaging studies  The amount of disability and discomfort depends on: How often and severe the attacks are The part of the central nervous system that is affected by each attack  Most people return to normal or near-normal function between attacks. Over time, there is greater loss of function with less improvement between attacks. Possible Complications 
 
 MS may lead to the following: Depression Difficulty swallowing Difficulty thinking Less and less ability to care for self Need for  indwelling catheter Osteoporosis  or thinning of the bones Pressure sores Side effects of medicines used to treat the disorder Urinary tract infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop any symptoms of MS Your symptoms get worse, even with treatment The condition worsens to the point when home care is no longer possible  Alternative Names 
 
 MS; Demyelinating disease Images 
 
 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 MRI of the brain 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Myelin and nerve structure 
 References 
 
 Fabian MT, Krieger SC, Lublin FD. Multiple sclerosis and other inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 80. Heine M, van de Port I, Rietberg MB, van Wegen EE, Kwakkel G. Exercise therapy for fatigue in multiple sclerosis.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;(9):CD009956. PMID: 26358158  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26358158 . Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDonald criteria.  Ann Neurol . 2011;69(2):292-302. PMID: 21387374  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21387374 . Rubin SM. Management of multiple sclerosis: an overview.  Dis Mon . 2013;59(7):253-260. PMID: 23786659  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23786659 . Widener GL. Multiple sclerosis. In: Umphred DA, Burton GU, Lazaro RT, Roller ML, eds.  Umphred's Neurological Rehabilitation . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Immune response 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Caring for muscle spasticity or spasms  
 Constipation - self-care 
 Daily bowel care program 
 Multiple sclerosis - discharge 
 Preventing pressure ulcers 
 Swallowing problems  
 Review Date 8/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Multiple Sclerosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia