
 Neuralgia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neuralgia is a sharp, shocking pain that follows the path of a nerve and is due to irritation or damage to the nerve. Common neuralgias include: Postherptic neuralgia  (pain that continues after a bout of shingles) Trigeminal neuralgia  (stabbing or electric-shock-like pain in parts of the face) Causes 
 
 Causes of neuralgia include: Chemical irritation Chronic kidney disease Diabetes Infections, such as herpes zoster ( shingles ), HIV/AIDS,  Lyme disease , and  syphilis Medicines such as cisplatin, paclitaxel, or vincristine Porphyria  (blood disorder) Pressure on nerves by nearby bones, ligaments, blood vessels, or tumors Trauma (including surgery)  In many cases, the cause is unknown. Postherpetic neuralgia  and trigeminal neuralgia are the two most common forms of neuralgia. A related but less common neuralgia affects the  glossopharyngeal nerve , which provides feeling to the throat. Neuralgia is more common in older people, but it may occur at any age. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Increased sensitivity of the skin along the path of the damaged nerve, so that any touch or pressure is felt as pain Pain along the path of the nerve that is sharp or stabbing, in the same location each episode, comes and goes (intermittent) or is constant and burning, and may get worse when the area is moved Weakness or complete paralysis of muscles supplied by the same nerve  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam, and ask about the symptoms. The exam may show: Abnormal sensation in the skin Reflex problems Loss of muscle mass Lack of sweating (sweating is controlled by nerves) Tenderness along a nerve Trigger points (areas where even a slight touch triggers pain)  You may also need to see a dentist if the pain is in your face or jaw. A dental exam can rule out dental disorders that may cause  facial pain  (such as a  tooth abscess ).  Other symptoms (such as redness or swelling) may help rule out conditions such as infections, bone fractures, or  rheumatoid arthritis . There are no specific tests for neuralgia. But, the following tests may be done to find the cause of the pain: Blood tests to check  blood sugar , kidney function, and other possible causes of neuralgia Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) Nerve conduction study with electromyography Ultrasound Spinal tap ( lumbar puncture )  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause, location, and severity of the pain. Medicines to control pain may include: Antidepressants Antiseizure drugs Over-the-counter or prescription pain medicines Pain medicines in the form of skin patches or creams Other treatments may include: Shots with pain-relieving (anesthetic) drugs Nerve blocks Physical therapy (for some types of neuralgia, especially postherpetic neuralgia) Procedures to reduce feeling in the nerve (such as nerve ablation using radiofrequency, heat, balloon compression, or injection of chemicals) Surgery to take pressure off a nerve Alternative therapy, such as acupuncture or biofeedback Procedures may not improve symptoms and can cause loss of feeling or abnormal sensations. When other treatments fail, doctors may try nerve or spinal cord stimulation. In rare cases, a procedure called motor cortex stimulation (MCS) is tried. An electrode is placed over part of nerve, spinal cord, or brain and is hooked to a pulse generator under the skin. This changes how your nerves signal and it may reduce pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most neuralgias are not life threatening and are not signs of other life-threatening disorders. For severe pain that does not improve, see a pain specialist so that you can explore all treatment options. Most neuralgias respond to treatment. Attacks of pain usually come and go. But, attacks may become more frequent in some people as they get older. Sometimes, the condition may improve on its own or disappear with time, even when the cause is not found. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Problems from surgery Disability caused by pain Side effects of drugs used to control pain Dental procedures that aren't needed before neuralgia is diagnosed When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if: You develop shingles You have symptoms of neuralgia, especially if over-the-counter pain medicines do not relieve your pain You have severe pain (see a pain specialist) Prevention 
 
 Strict control of blood sugar may prevent nerve damage in people with diabetes. In the case of shingles, antiviral drugs and the herpes zoster virus vaccine may prevent neuralgia. Alternative Names 
 
 Nerve pain; Painful neuropathy; Neuropathic pain Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Scadding JW, Koltzenberg M. Painful peripheral neuropathies. In: McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turk DC, eds.  Wall and Melzack's Textbook of Pain . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 65. Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 420. Read More 
 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Shingles 
 Transient tic disorder 
 Trigeminal neuralgia 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia