
 Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hydrocephalus is a buildup of spinal fluid inside the fluid chambers of the brain. Hydrocephalus means "water on the brain." Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a rise in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain that affects brain function. However, the pressure of the fluid is usually normal. Causes 
 
 There is no known cause for NPH. But the chance of developing NPH is high in someone who has had any of the following: Bleeding from a blood vessel or  aneurysm  in the brain ( subarachnoid hemorrhage ) Certain head injuries Meningitis  or similar infections Surgery on the brain ( craniotomy ) As CSF builds up in the brain, the fluid-filled chambers (ventricles) of the brain swell. This causes pressure on brain tissue. This can damage or destroy parts of the brain. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of NPH often begin slowly. There are 3 main symptoms of NPH: Changes in the way a person walks: difficulty when beginning to walk (gait apraxia), feel as if they are stuck to the ground (magnetic gait) Slowing of mental function: forgetfulness, difficulty paying attention, apathy or no mood Problems controlling urine ( urinary incontinence ), and sometimes controlling stools ( bowel incontinence ) Diagnosis of NPH can be made if any of the above symptoms occur and NPH is suspected and testing is done. Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical examination and ask about the symptoms. If you have NPH, the doctor will likely find that your walking (gait) is not normal. You may also have memory problems.  Tests that may be done include: Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) with careful testing of walking before and right after the spinal tap Head CT scan  or  MRI of the head Treatment 
 
 Treatment for NPH is usually surgery to place a tube called a shunt that routes the excess CSF out of the brain ventricles. This is called a  ventricoperitoneal shunt . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, symptoms often get worse and could lead to death. Surgery improves symptoms in some people. Those with mild symptoms have the best outcome. Walking is the symptom most likely to improve. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result from NPH or its treatment include: Complications of surgery (infection, bleeding, shunt that does not work well) Loss of brain function ( dementia ) that becomes worse over time Injury from falls Shortened life span  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You or a loved one is having increasing problems with memory, walking, or urine incontinence. A person with NPH worsens to the point where you are unable to care for the person yourself. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if a sudden  change in mental status  occurs. This may mean that another disorder has developed. Alternative Names 
 
 Hydrocephalus - occult; Hydrocephalus - idiopathic; Hydrocephalus - adult; Hydrocephalus - communicating; Dementia - hydrocephalus; NPH Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Ventricles of the brain 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Normal pressure hydrocephalus. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 648. Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 88. Read More 
 
 Brain surgery 
 Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) collection 
 Dementia 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Meningitis 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ventriculoperitoneal shunt - discharge 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia