
 Opisthotonos 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Opisthotonos is a condition in which a person holds their body in an abnormal position. The person is usually rigid and arches their back, with their head thrown backward. If a person with opisthotonos lies on their back, only the back of their head and heels touch the surface they are on. Considerations 
 
 Opisthotonos is much more common in infants and children than in adults. It is also more extreme in infants and children because of their less mature nervous systems. Causes 
 
 Opisthotonos may occur in infants with meningitis. It may also occur as a sign of reduced brain function or injury to the nervous system. Other causes may include: A problem with the structure of the brain called Arnold-Chiari syndrome  Brain tumor Gaucher disease , which causes a buildup of fatty tissue in certain organs Growth hormone deficiency  (occasionally) Forms of chemical poisoning called glutaric aciduria and organic acidemias  Krabbe Disease , which destroys the coating of nerves in the central nervous system Seizures Severe  electrolyte  imbalance Severe  head injury Stiff-person syndrome (a condition that makes a person rigid and have spasms) Bleeding in the brain  Tetanus Some antipsychotic medicines can cause a side effect called  acute  dystonic reaction. Opisthotonos may be part of this reaction. In rare cases, infants born to women who drink large amounts of alcohol during pregnancy may have opisthotonus due to alcohol withdrawal. Home Care 
 
 A person who develops opisthotonos will need to be cared for in a hospital. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call your local emergency number (such as 911) if symptoms of opisthotonos occur. Typically, opisthotonos is a symptom of other conditions that are serious enough for a person to seek medical attention. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 This condition will be evaluated in a hospital, and emergency measures may be taken. Your health care provider will take a medical history and perform a  physical examination  to look for the cause of opisthotonos Medical history questions may include: When did this behavior start? Is it always the same type of posturing? What other symptoms came before or with the abnormal posturing (such as fever, stiff neck, or headache)? Is there any recent history of illness? The physical examination will include a complete checkup of the nervous system. Tests may include: Blood and urine tests Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture  and cell counts CT scan of the head Electrolyte  analysis Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) MRI of the brain References 
 
 Chiriboga CA. HIV, fetal alcohol and drug effects, and the battered child. In: Rowland LP, Pedley TA, eds.  Merritt's Neurology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009. Layzer RB, Rowland LP. Muscle cramps and stiffness.  Merritt's Neurology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:chap 145. Patterson MC, Johnson WG. Lysosomal and other storage diseases. In: Rowland LP, Pedley TA, eds.  Merritt's Neurology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009. Scher MS, Diagnosis and treatment of neonatal seizures. In: Perlman JM, ed.  Neurology: Neonatal Questions and Controversies . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 8. Thwaites LC, Yen LM. Tetanus, In: Farrar J, Hotez PJ, Junghanss T, Kang G, Lalloo D, White NJ, eds.  Manson's Tropical Diseases . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 32. Read More 
 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neurologic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia