
 Partial (focal) seizure 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 All seizures are caused by abnormal electrical disturbances in the brain. Partial (focal) seizures occur when this electrical activity remains in a limited area of the brain. The seizures can sometimes turn into  generalized seizures , which affect the whole brain. This is called secondary generalization. Partial seizures can be divided into: Simple, not affecting awareness or memory Complex, affecting awareness or memory of events before, during, and immediately after the seizure, and affecting behavior  Causes 
 
 Partial seizures are the most common type of seizure in people 1 year and older. In people older than 65 who have blood vessel disease of the brain or brain tumors, partial seizures are very common. Symptoms 
 
 People with complex partial seizures may or may not remember any or all of the symptoms or events during the seizure. Depending on where in the brain the seizure starts, symptoms can include: Abnormal  muscle contraction , such as abnormal head movements Staring spells, sometimes with repetitive movements such as picking at clothes or lip smacking Eyes moving from side to side Abnormal sensations , such as  numbness ,  tingling , crawling sensation (like ants crawling on the skin) Hallucinations , seeing, smelling, or sometimes hearing things that are not there Abdominal pain or discomfort Nausea Sweating Flushed face Dilated pupils Rapid heart rate/pulse Other symptoms may include: Blackout spells, periods of time lost from memory Changes in vision Sensation of déjà vu (feeling like current place and time have been experienced before) Changes in mood  or emotion Temporary inability to speak  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. This will include a detailed look at the brain and nervous system. An  EEG (electroencephalogram)  will be done to check the electrical activity in the brain. People with seizures often have abnormal electrical activity seen on this test. In some cases, the test shows the area in the brain where the seizures start. The brain may appear normal after a seizure or between seizures. Blood tests may also be ordered to check for other health problems that may be causing the seizures. Head  CT  or  MRI  scan may be done to find the cause and location of the problem in the brain. Treatment 
 
 Treatment  for partial focal seizures includes medicines, changes in lifestyle for  adults  and  children , such as activity and diet, and sometimes surgery. Your doctor can tell you more about these options. Alternative Names 
 
 Focal seizure; Jacksonian seizure; Seizure - partial (focal); Temporal lobe seizure; Epilepsy - partial seizures Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Abou-Khalil BW, Gallagher MJ, Macdonald RL. Epilepsies. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 101. Wiebe S. The epilepsies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 403. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizure 
 Seizures 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Seizures 
 Browse the Encyclopedia