
 Wilson disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Wilson disease is an inherited disorder in which there is too much copper in the body's tissues. The excess copper damages the liver and nervous system.  Causes 
 
 Wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder. If both parents carry an abnormal gene for Wilson disease, there is a 25% chance in each pregnancy that the child will have the disorder. Wilson disease causes the body to take in and keep too much copper. The copper deposits in the liver, brain, kidneys, and eyes. The copper deposits cause tissue damage, tissue death, and scarring, which causes the affected organs to stop working correctly. This condition is most common in eastern Europeans, Sicilians, and southern Italians, but it may occur in any group. Wilson disease typically appears in people under 40 years old. In children, the symptoms begin to show by age 4. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abnormal posture of arms and legs Confusion  or  delirium Dementia Difficulty moving arms and legs, stiffness Difficulty walking  (ataxia) Emotional or behavioral changes Enlargement of the abdomen ( abdominal distention ) Personality changes Phobias , distress (neuroses) Slow movements Slow or decreased movement and expressions of the face Speech impairment Tremors of the arms or hands Uncontrollable movement Unpredictable and jerky movement Vomiting blood Weakness Yellow skin (jaundice) or yellow color of the white of the eye (icterus) Exams and Tests 
 
 A slit-lamp eye exam may show: Limited eye movement Rusty or brown-colored ring around the iris (Kayser-Fleischer rings) A physical exam may show signs of: Damage to the central nervous system, including loss of coordination, loss of muscle control, muscle tremors, loss of thinking and IQ, loss of memory, and confusion (delirium or dementia) Liver or spleen disorders (including hepatomegaly and  splenomegaly ) Lab tests may include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Serum ceruloplasmin Serum copper Serum  uric acid Urine copper If there are liver problems, lab tests may find: High  AST  and  ALT High  bilirubin High  PT  and  PTT Low  albumin Other tests may include: 24-hour urine copper test Abdominal x-ray Abdominal MRI CT scan of the abdomen Head CT scan Head MRI Liver biopsy Upper GI endoscopy The gene that causes Wilson disease has been found. It is called ATP7B. DNA testing is available for this gene. Talk to your health care provider or a genetic counselor if you would like to have gene testing performed. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce the amount of copper in the tissues. This is done by a procedure called chelation. Certain medicines are given that bind to copper and help remove it through the kidneys or gut. Treatment must be lifelong. The following medicines may be used: Penicillamine (such as Cuprimine, Depen) binds to copper and leads to increased release of copper in the urine. Trientine (such as Syprine) binds (chelates) the copper and increases its release through the urine. Zinc acetate (such as Galzin) blocks copper from being absorbed in the intestinal tract.  Vitamin E supplements may also be used. Sometimes, medicines that chelate copper (such as penicillamine) can affect the function of the brain and nervous system (neurological function). Other medicines under investigation may bind copper without affecting neurological function. A low-copper diet may also be recommended. Foods to avoid include: Chocolate Dried fruit Liver Mushrooms Nuts Shellfish You may want to drink distilled water because most tap water flows through copper pipes. Avoid using copper cooking utensils. Symptoms may be managed with exercise or physical therapy. People who are confused or unable to care for themselves may need special protective measures. A liver transplant may be considered in cases where the liver is severely damaged by the disease. Support Groups 
 
 Wilson disease support groups can be found at  www.wilsonsdisease.org  and  www.geneticalliance.org . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Life-long treatment is needed to control Wilson disease. The disorder may cause fatal effects, such as loss of liver function. Copper can have toxic effects on the nervous system. In cases where the disorder is not fatal, symptoms may be disabling. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Anemia  ( hemolytic anemia  is rare) Central nervous system complications Cirrhosis Death of liver tissues Fatty liver Hepatitis Increased number of bone fractures Increased number of infections Injury caused by falls Jaundice Joint  contractures  or other deformity Loss of ability to care for self Loss of ability to function at work and home Loss of ability to interact with other people Loss of muscle mass (muscle atrophy) Psychological complications Side effects of penicillamine and other medicines used to treat the disorder Spleen problems  Liver failure and damage to the central nervous system (brain, spinal cord) are the most common and dangerous effects of the disorder. If Wilson disease is not caught and treated early, it can be fatal. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of Wilson disease. Call a genetic counselor if you have a history of Wilson disease in your family and you are planning to have children. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for people with a family history of Wilson disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Wilson's disease; Hepatolenticular degeneration Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Copper urine test 
 References 
 
 Cox DW, Roberts EA. Wilson disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 76. Kaler SG, Schilsky ML. Wilson disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 211. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Cirrhosis 
 Contracture deformity 
 Hepatitis B 
 Liver disease 
 
 Review Date 8/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics at the University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Wilson Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia