
 B-cell leukemia/lymphoma panel 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 B-cell leukemia/lymphoma panel is a blood test that looks for certain proteins on the surface of white blood cells called B-lymphocytes. The proteins are markers that may help diagnose  leukemia  or lymphoma. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. In some cases, white blood cells are removed during a  bone marrow biopsy . The sample may also be taken during a  lymph node biopsy  or other biopsy when lymphoma is suspected. The blood sample is sent to a laboratory, where a specialist checks the cell type and characteristics. This procedure is called immunophenotyping. The test is usually done using a technique called flow cytometry. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is usually necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done for the following reasons: When other tests (such as a  blood smear ) show signs of abnormal white blood cells When leukemia or lymphoma is suspected To find out the type of leukemia or lymphoma  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results usually indicate either: B-cell  lymphocytic leukemia Lymphoma Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 B lymphocyte cell surface markerspasting; Flow cytometry - leukemia/lymphoma immunophenotyping Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Appelbaum FR. The acute leukemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 183. Bierman PJ, Armitage JO. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 185. Borowitz MJ. Flow cytometry in oncologic diagnosis. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 15. Connors JM. Hodgkin lymphoma. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 186. Read More 
 
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 Leukemia 
 Lymphoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia