
 Basal cell skin cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Basal cell cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States. Most skin cancers are basal cell cancer. Basal cell cancer is almost always slow-growing. Other common types of skin cancer are: Squamous cell Melanoma Causes 
 
 The top layer of the skin is called the epidermis. The bottom layer of the epidermis is the basal cell layer. With basal cancer, cells in this layer are the ones that become cancerous. Most basal cell cancers occur on skin that is regularly exposed to sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation. This type of skin cancer is most common in people over age 40. But it can also occur in younger people who have had extensive sun exposure.  You are more likely to get basal cell cancer if you have: Light-colored or freckled skin Blue, green, or grey eyes Blond or red hair Overexposure to  x-rays  or other forms of radiation Many moles Close relatives who have or had skin cancer Many severe sunburns early in life Long-term daily sun exposure (such as the sun exposure received by people who work outside) Symptoms 
 
 Basal cell cancer grows slowly and is usually painless. It may not look that different from your normal skin. You may have a skin bump or growth that is: Pearly or waxy White or light pink Flesh-colored or brown A red, scaly patch of skin In some cases, the skin is just slightly raised, or even flat. You may have: A skin sore that bleeds easily A sore that does not heal Oozing or crusting spots in a sore A scar-like sore without having injured the area Irregular blood vessels in or around the spot A sore with a depressed (sunken) area in the middle Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will check your skin and look at the size, shape, color, and texture of any suspicious areas. If your doctor thinks you might have skin cancer, a piece of skin will be removed. This is called a  skin biopsy . The sample is sent to a lab for examination under a microscope. A skin biopsy must be done to confirm basal cell cancer or other skin cancers. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the size, depth, and location of the skin cancer, and your overall health. Treatment may involve any of the following: Excision: Cutting out the skin cancer and stitching the skin together Curettage and electrodessication: Scraping away cancer cells and using electricity to kill any that remain; used to treat cancers that are not large or deep Cryosurgery: Freezing the cancer cells, which kills them; used to treat cancers that are not large or deep Medication: Skin creams that have medicine; used to treat cancers that are not large or deep Mohs surgery: Removing a layer of skin and looking at it immediately under a microscope, then removing layers of skin until there are no signs of the cancer; usually used for skin cancers on the nose, ears, and other areas of the face Photodynamic therapy: Treatment using light; used to treat cancers that are not large or deep Radiation: May be used if a basal cell cancer cannot be treated with surgery Chemotherapy : May be used to treat basal cell cancer that has spread to other parts of the body or that cannot be treated with surgery  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of these cancers are cured when treated early. Some basal cell cancers return. Smaller ones are less likely to come back. Possible Complications 
 
 Basal cell skin cancer almost never spreads. If it is left untreated, it may spread into surrounding areas and nearby tissues and bone. In these cases, treatment can injure the appearance of the skin. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have a sore or spot on your skin that changes in: Appearance Color Size Texture Also call your provider if a spot becomes painful or swollen, or if it starts to bleed or itch. Prevention 
 
 The American Cancer Society recommends that a provider examines your skin every year if you are older than 40 and every 3 years if you are 20 to 40 years old. You should also examine your own skin once a month. The best way to prevent skin cancer is to  reduce your exposure to sunlight . Always use sunscreen: Apply sunscreen with sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30, even when you are going outdoors for a short time. Apply a large amount of sunscreen on all exposed areas, including ears and feet. Look for sunscreen that blocks both UVA and UVB light. Use a water-resistant sunscreen. Apply sunscreen at least 30 minutes before going out. Follow package instructions about how often to reapply. Be sure to reapply after swimming or sweating. Use sunscreen in winter and on cloudy days, too.  Other measures to help you avoid too much sun exposure: Ultraviolet light is most intense between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Try to avoid the sun during these hours.  Protect the skin by wearing wide-brim hats, long-sleeve shirts, long skirts, or pants. Avoid surfaces that reflect light more, such as water, sand, concrete, and areas that are painted white. The higher the altitude, the faster your skin burns. Do not use sun lamps and tanning beds (salons). Spending 15 to 20 minutes at a tanning salon is as dangerous as a day spent in the sun. Alternative Names 
 
 Basal cell carcinoma; Rodent ulcer; Skin cancer - basal cell; Cancer - skin - basal cell; Nonmelanoma skin cancer; Basal cell NMSC; Basal cell epithelioma Images 
 
 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - close-up of palm 
 Skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma - nose 
 Skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma - pigmented 
 Skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma - behind ear 
 Skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma - spreading 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - plantar pits 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - face and hand 
 Multiple basal cell cancer due to x-ray therapy for acne 
 Basal Cell Carcinoma - face 
 Basal cell carcinoma - close-up 
 Basal cell cancer 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute: PDQ Skin Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified July 15, 2015.  http://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/hp/skin-treatment-pdq#section/_222. Accessed September 10, 2015.National Cancer Institute: PDQ Skin Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified July 15, 2015. http://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/hp/skin-treatment-pdq#section/_222. Accessed September 10, 2015. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): Basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers. Version 1.2015.  http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nmsc.pdf. Accessed September 10, 2015.National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): Basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers. Version 1.2015. http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nmsc.pdf. Accessed September 10, 2015. Spencer JM, Walls BM. Basal cell carcinoma. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA sheds light on sunscreens. Last updated February 13, 2015.  http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm258416.htm. Accessed September 10, 2015.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA sheds light on sunscreens. Last updated February 13, 2015. http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm258416.htm. Accessed September 10, 2015. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Tumor 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 7/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia