
 Burkitt lymphoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a very fast growing form of  non-Hodgkin lymphoma . Causes 
 
 BL was first discovered in children in certain parts of Africa. It also occurs in the United States. The African type of BL is closely associated with the Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ), the main cause of  infectious mononucleosis . The North American form of BL is not linked to EBV.  People with  HIV/AIDS  have an increased risk for this condition. BL is most often seen in males. Symptoms 
 
 BL may first be noticed as a  swelling of the lymph nodes  (glands) in the head and neck. These swollen lymph nodes are often painless, but can grow very rapidly. In the types commonly seen in the United States, the cancer often starts in the belly area (abdomen). The disease can also start in the ovaries, testes, brain, and spinal fluid. Other general symptoms may include: 
   Fever
    
   Night sweats
    Unexplained weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests include: Bone marrow biopsy Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis Complete blood count (CBC) Examination of the spinal fluid Lymph node biopsy PET scan Treatment 
 
 Chemotherapy is used to treat this type of cancer. If the cancer does not respond to chemotherapy alone, a  bone marrow transplant  may be done. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 More than one half of people with BL can be cured with intensive chemotherapy. The cure rate may be lower if the cancer spreads to the bone marrow or spinal fluid. The outlook is poor if the cancer comes back after a remission or does not go into remission as a result of the first cycle of chemotherapy. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications of BL include: Complications of treatment Spread of the cancer  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of BL. Alternative Names 
 
 B-cell lymphoma; High-grade B-cell lymphoma; Small noncleaved cell lymphoma Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Lymphoma, malignant - CT scan 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute. PDQ adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Updated June 1, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/hp/adult-nhl-treatment-pdq#section/all . Accessed July 11, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Updated May 3, 2016. Version 3.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nhl.pdf . Accessed July 11, 2016. Roschewski MJ, Wilson WH. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Mononucleosis 
 Radiation therapy 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia