
 Cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cancer is the uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells in the body. Cancerous cells are also called malignant cells. Causes 
 
 Cancer grows out of cells in the body. Normal cells multiply when the body needs them, and die when they are damaged or the body doesn't need them.  Cancer appears to occur when the genetic material of a cell becomes changed. This results in cells growing out of control. Cells divide too quickly and do not die in a normal way. There are many kinds of cancer. Cancer can develop in almost any organ or tissue, such as the lung, colon, breast, skin, bones, or nerve tissue. There are many risk factors for cancer, including: Benzene and other chemicals Drinking too much alcohol Environmental toxins, such as certain poisonous mushrooms and a type of poison that can grow on peanut plants (aflatoxins) Genetic problems Obesity  Radiation exposure Too much sunlight exposure Viruses The cause of many cancers remains unknown. The most common cause of cancer-related death is lung cancer. In the U.S., skin cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer. In U.S. men, other than skin cancer the three most common cancers are: Prostate cancer Lung cancer Colorectal cancer In U.S. women, other than skin cancer the three most common cancers are: Breast cancer Lung cancer Colorectal cancer Some cancers are more common in certain parts of the world. For example, in Japan, there are many cases of  stomach cancer . But in the United States, this type of cancer is less common. Differences in diet or environmental factors may play a role. Some other types of cancer include: Brain cancer Cervical cancer Hodgkin lymphoma Kidney cancer Leukemia Liver cancer Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Ovarian cancer Pancreatic cancer Testicular cancer Thyroid cancer Uterine cancer Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of cancer depend on the type and location of the cancer. For example, lung cancer can cause  coughing ,  shortness of breath , or  chest pain . Colon cancer often causes  diarrhea ,  constipation , and  blood in the stool . Some cancers may not have any symptoms. In certain cancers, such as pancreatic cancer, symptoms often do not start until the disease has reached an advanced stage. The following symptoms may occur with cancer: Chills Fatigue Fever Loss of appetite Malaise Night sweats Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Like symptoms, the signs of cancer vary based on the type and location of the tumor. Common tests include the following: Biopsy  of the tumor Blood tests (which look for chemicals such as tumor markers) Bone marrow biopsy  (for lymphoma or leukemia) Chest x-ray Complete blood count  (CBC) CT scan Liver function tests MRI scan PET scan Most cancers are diagnosed by biopsy. Depending on the location of the tumor, the biopsy may be a simple procedure or a serious operation. Most patients with cancer have CT scans to determine the exact location and size of the tumor or tumors. A cancer diagnosis is often difficult to cope with. It is important that you discuss the type, size, and location of the cancer with your health care provider when you are diagnosed. You also will want to ask about treatment options, along with their benefits and risks. It's a good idea to have someone with you at the provider's office to help you get through the diagnosis. If you have trouble asking questions after hearing about your diagnosis, the person you bring with you can ask them for you. Treatment 
 
 Treatment varies based on the type of cancer and its stage. The stage of a cancer refers to how much it has grown and whether the tumor has spread from its original location. If the cancer is in one location and has not spread, the most common treatment approach is surgery to cure the cancer. This is often the case with  skin cancers , as well as cancers of the lung, breast, and colon. If the tumor has spread to local lymph nodes only, sometimes these can be removed. If surgery cannot remove all of the cancer, the options for treatment may include  radiation ,  chemotherapy , targeted cancer therapies, or other types of treatment. Some cancers require a combination of treatments. Lymphoma, or cancer of the lymph glands, is rarely treated with surgery. Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and other nonsurgical therapies are often used. Although treatment for cancer can be difficult, there are many ways to keep up your strength. If you have radiation treatment: Treatment is usually scheduled every weekday. You should allow 30 minutes for each treatment session, although the treatment itself usually takes only a few minutes. You should get plenty of rest and eat a well-balanced diet during the course of your radiation therapy. Skin in the treated area may become sensitive and easily irritated. Some side effects of radiation treatment are temporary. They vary depending on the area of the body that is being treated.  If you have chemotherapy: Eat right. Get plenty of rest, and don't feel like you have to accomplish tasks all at once. Avoid people with colds or the flu. Chemotherapy can cause your immune system to weaken. Talk with family, friends, or a support group about your feelings. Work with your health care providers throughout your treatment. Helping yourself can make you feel more in control. Support Groups 
 
 The diagnosis and treatment of cancer often causes a lot of anxiety and can affect a person's entire life. There are many  resources  for cancer patients. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the type of cancer and the stage of the cancer when diagnosed.   Some cancers can be cured. Other cancers that are not curable can still be treated effectively. Some patients can live for many years with cancer. Other tumors are quickly life threatening. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the type and stage of cancer. The cancer may spread.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you develop symptoms of cancer. Prevention 
 
 You can reduce the risk of getting a cancerous (malignant) tumor by: Eating healthy foods Exercising regularly Limiting alcohol Maintaining a healthy weight Minimizing your exposure to radiation and toxic chemicals Not smoking or chewing tobacco Reducing sun exposure, especially if you burn easily Cancer screenings, such as  mammography  and breast examination for breast cancer and  colonoscopy  for colon cancer, may help catch these cancers at their early stages when they are most treatable. Some people at high risk for developing certain cancers can take medication to reduce their risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Carcinoma; Malignant tumor References 
 
 National Cancer Institute. Chemotherapy and you: support for people who have cancer. Available at:  http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/chemotherapy-and-you. Accessed January 8, 2015.National Cancer Institute. Chemotherapy and you: support for people who have cancer. Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/chemotherapy-and-you. Accessed January 8, 2015. National Cancer Institute. Radiation therapy and you: support for people who have cancer. Available at:  http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/radiation-therapy-and-you. Accessed January 8, 2015.National Cancer Institute. Radiation therapy and you: support for people who have cancer. Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/radiation-therapy-and-you. Accessed January 8, 2015. Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014. Perry MC. Approach to the patient with cancer. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 182. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.  CA Cancer J Clin . 2015;65:5-29. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 Colon cancer 
 Endometrial cancer 
 Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy 
 Esophageal cancer 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Iontophoresis 
 Leukemia 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Lung cancer - non-small cell 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 Obesity 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Prostate cancer 
 Stomach cancer 
 Testicular cancer 
 Throat or larynx cancer 
 Thyroid cancer 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 After chemotherapy - discharge 
 Review Date 1/18/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia