
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hodgkin lymphoma is a cancer of lymph tissue. Lymph tissue is found in the lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, and other sites. Causes 
 
 The cause of Hodgkin lymphoma is not known. Hodgkin lymphoma is most common among people 15 to 35 years old and 50 to 70 years old. Past infection with the Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) is thought to contribute to some cases. People with HIV infection are at increased risk compared to the general population. Symptoms 
 
 The first sign of Hodgkin lymphoma is often a swollen lymph node that appears without a known cause. The disease can spread to nearby lymph nodes. Later it may spread to the spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other organs. Symptoms may include any of the following: Fatigue Fever and chills that come and go Itching all over the body that cannot be explained Loss of appetite Drenching night sweats Painless swelling of the lymph nodes in the neck, armpits, or groin ( swollen glands ) Weight loss that cannot be explained  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Coughing, chest pains, or breathing problems if there are swollen lymph nodes in the chest Excessive sweating Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs due to swollen spleen or liver Pain in lymph nodes after drinking alcohol Skin blushing or flushing  Symptoms caused by Hodgkin lymphoma may occur with other conditions. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and check body areas with lymph nodes to feel if they are swollen. The disease is often diagnosed after a biopsy of suspected tissue, usually a lymph node. The following procedures will usually be done: Blood chemistry tests  including protein levels, liver function tests, kidney function tests, and uric acid level Bone marrow biopsy CT scans of the chest , abdomen, and pelvis Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for anemia and white blood count PET (positron emission tomography) scan If tests show that you have Hodgkin lymphoma, more tests will be done to see how far the cancer has spread. This is called staging. Staging helps guide treatment and follow-up. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the following: The type of Hodgkin lymphoma (there are different forms of Hodgkin lymphoma) The  stage  (where the disease has spread) Whether the tumor is more than 4 inches (10 cm) wide Your age and other medical issues Other factors, including weight loss, night sweats, and fever  You may receive  chemotherapy ,  radiation therapy , or both. Your doctor can tell you more about your specific treatment. High-dose chemotherapy may be given when Hodgkin lymphoma returns after treatment or does not respond to the first treatment. This is followed by a  stem cell transplant  that uses your own stem cells. You and your health care provider may need to manage other concerns during your leukemia treatment, including: Having chemotherapy at home Managing your pets  during chemotherapy Bleeding problems Dry mouth Eating enough calories Safe eating  during cancer treatment Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the most curable cancers. Cure is even more likely if it is diagnosed and treated early. Unlike other cancers, Hodgkin lymphoma is also very curable in its late stages. You will need to have regular exams and imaging tests for years after your treatment. This helps your doctor check for signs of the cancer returning and for any long-term treatment effects. Possible Complications 
 
 Treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma can have complications. Long-term complications of chemotherapy or radiation therapy include: Bone marrow diseases (such as leukemia) Heart disease Inability to have children ( infertility ) Lung problems Other cancers Thyroid problems  Keep following up with a doctor who knows about monitoring and preventing these complications.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma You have Hodgkin lymphoma and you have side effects from the treatment  Alternative Names 
 
 Lymphoma - Hodgkin; Hodgkin disease; Cancer - Hodgkin lymphoma Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Hodgkin's disease, liver involvement 
 Lymphoma, malignant - CT scan 
 Immune system structures 
 References 
 
 Bartlett NL, Foyli KV. Hodgkin lymphoma. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 105. National Cancer Institute: PDQ adult Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 12, 2016.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/adulthodgkins/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Cancer Institute: PDQ childhood Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 3, 2016.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childhodgkins/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: Hodgkin lymphoma. Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/hodgkins.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor 
 Chest radiation - discharge 
 Eating extra calories when sick - adults 
 Mouth and neck radiation - discharge 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hodgkin Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia