
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is cancer of the lymph tissue. Lymph tissue is found in the lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils, bone marrow, and other organs of the immune system. The immune system protects us against diseases and infections. This article is about NHL in children. Causes 
 
 NHL tends to occur more often in adults. But children do get some types of NHL. NHL occurs more often in boys. It usually doesn’t occur in children younger than age 3.  The exact cause of NHL in children is not known. But, the development of lymphomas in children has been associated with: Past cancer treatment (radiation treatment, chemotherapy) A weak immune system from an organ transplant Epstein-Barr virus, the virus that causes  mononucleosis HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) infection There are many types of NHL. One classification (grouping) is by how fast the cancer spreads. The cancer may be low grade (slow growing), intermediate grade, or high grade (fast growing). NHL is further grouped by: How the cells look under the microscope What type of white blood cell it originates from Whether there are certain DNA changes in the tumor cells themselves Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on which area of the body is affected by the cancer and how fast the cancer is growing. Symptoms may include: Swollen lymph nodes  in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Painless swelling or lump in the testicle Swelling of the head, neck, arms or upper body Trouble swallowing Trouble breathing Wheezing Persistent cough Swelling in the belly Night sweats Weight loss Fatigue Unexplained fever Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will take your child’s medical history. The provider will do a physical exam to check for swollen lymph nodes. The provider may perform these lab tests when NHL is suspected: Blood chemistry tests  including protein levels, liver function tests, kidney function tests, and uric acid level Complete blood count  (CBC) ESR (sed rate) Chest x-ray, which often shows signs of a mass in the area between the lungs A  lymph node biopsy  confirms the diagnosis for NHL. If a biopsy shows that your child has NHL, more tests will be done to see how far the cancer has spread. This is called  staging . Staging helps guide future treatment and follow-up. CT scan  of the chest, abdomen and pelvis Bone marrow biopsy PET scan Immunophenotyping is a laboratory test used to identify cells, based on the types of antigens or markers on the surface of the cell. This test is used to diagnose the specific type of lymphoma by comparing the cancer cells to normal cells of the immune system. Treatment 
 
 You may choose to seek care at a  children's cancer center . Treatment will depend on: The type of NHL (there are many types of NHL) Stage (where the cancer has spread) Your child's age and overall health Your child's symptoms, including weight loss, fever, and night sweats Chemotherapy  is most often the first treatment: Your child may need to stay in the hospital at first. But most of the treatment for NHL can be given in a clinic, and your child will still live at home. Chemotherapy is given mainly into the veins (IV), but some chemotherapy is given by mouth. Your child may also receive  radiation therapy  using high-powered x-rays at cancer-affected areas. Other treatments may include: Targeted therapy  that uses drugs or antibodies to kill cancer cells High-dose chemotherapy may be followed by  stem cell transplant  (using your child's own stem cells) Surgery to remove the cancer may be needed in some cases Having a child with cancer is one of the hardest things you will ever deal with as a parent.  Explaining what it means to have cancer to your child  will not be easy. You will also need to  learn how to get help and support  so you can cope more easily. Support Groups 
 
 Having a child with cancer can be stressful. Joining a support group where other parents or families share common experiences may help ease your stress.  American Childhood Cancer Organization -  www.acco.org Leukemia and Lymphoma Society has support groups for families and patients -  www.lls.org    Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
Most forms of NHL are curable. Even late stages of NHL are curable in children. Your child will need to have regular exams and imaging tests for years after treatment to make sure the tumor does not come back. Even if the tumor comes back, there is a good chance of a cure. Regular follow-ups will also help the health care team check for signs of the cancer returning and for any long-term treatment effects. Possible Complications 
 
 Treatments for NHL may have complications. Side effects of chemotherapy or radiation therapy may appear months or years after treatment. These are called " late effects ." It is important to talk about treatment effects with your health care team. What to expect in terms of late effects depends on the specific treatments your child receives.  The concern of late effects must be balanced by the need to treat and cure the cancer. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your child's provider if your child has swollen lymph nodes with unexplained fever that does not go away or has other symptoms of NHL. If your child has NHL, call the provider if your child has a persistent fever or other signs of infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Lymphoma - non-Hodgkin - children; Lymphoblastic lymphoma - children; Burkitt lymphoma - children; Large cell lymphomas - children, Cancer - non-Hodgkin lymphoma - children; Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma - children; Mature B cell lymphoma - children; Anaplastic large cell lymphoma References 
 
 American Cancer Society. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma in children. Updated: January 27, 2016.  www.cancer.org/cancer/non-hodgkinlymphomainchildren/index . Accessed June 3, 2016. Cancer.Net. Lymphoma - non-Hodgkin - childhood. Updated August 2015.  www.cancer.net/cancer-types/lymphoma-non-hodgkin-childhood . Accessed June 3, 2016.  Hochberg J, Giulino-Roth L, Cairo MS. Lymphoma. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier. 2016:chap 496. National Cancer Institute. Childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. Updated May 20, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/hp/child-nhl-treatment-pdq . Accessed June 3, 2016.  National Cancer Institute. Childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment (PDQ) - patient version. Updated April 7, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/patient/child-nhl-treatment-pdq . Accessed June 3, 2016. 
 Review Date 8/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Adam S. Levy, MD, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia