
 Penile cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Penile cancer is  cancer  that starts in the  penis , an organ that makes up part of the male reproductive system.  Causes 
 
 Cancer of the penis is rare. Its exact cause is unknown. However, certain risk factors include: Uncircumcised men who don't keep the area under the foreskin clean. This leads to buildup of smegma, a cheese-like, foul-smelling substance under the foreskin History of  genital warts , or human papillomavirus (HPV). Smoking. Injury to the penis. The cancer usually affects middle age and older men. Symptoms 
 
 Early symptoms may include: Sore, bump, rash, or swelling at the tip or on the shaft of the penis Foul-smelling discharge beneath the foreskin As the cancer advances, symptoms may include: Pain and bleeding from the penis (may occur with advanced disease) Lumps in the groin area from spread of the cancer to the groin lymph nodes Weight loss Difficulty in passing urine Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your health history and symptoms. A  biopsy  of the growth is needed to determine if it is cancer. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the size and location of the tumor and how much it has spread. Treatment for penile cancer may include: Chemotherapy -- uses medicines to kill cancer cells Radiation -- uses high-powered x-rays to kill cancer cells Surgery - cuts out and removes the cancer If the tumor is small or near the tip of the penis, surgery may be done to remove only the cancerous part of the penis where the cancer is found. Depending on the exact location, this is called a glansectomy or partial penectomy. Laser surgery may be used to treat some tumors. For more severe tumors, total removal of the penis (total penectomy) is often needed. A new opening will be created in the groin area to allow urine to exit the body. This procedure is called a urethrostomy. Chemotherapy  may be used along with surgery.   Radiation therapy  may be used along with surgery. A type of radiation therapy called external beam therapy is often used. This method delivers radiation to the penis from outside the body. This therapy is most often performed 5 days a week for 6 to 8 weeks. Support Groups 
 
 Joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems may help relieve the stress associated with diagnosis and treatment of cancer of the penis. See:  Cancer - support group Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome can be good with early diagnosis and treatment. Urination and sexual function can often be maintained. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, penile cancer can spread to other parts of the body ( metastasizes ) early in the disease. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms of penile cancer develop. Prevention 
 
 Circumcision may decrease the risk. Men who are not circumcised should be taught at an early age the importance of cleaning beneath the foreskin as part of their personal hygiene. Safer sexual practices , such as abstinence, limiting the number of sexual partners, and using condoms to prevent HPV infection, may decrease the risk of developing cancer of the penis. Alternative Names 
 
 Cancer - penis; Squamous cell cancer - penis; Glansectomy; Partial penectomy Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive system 
 References 
 
 Heinlen JE, Culkin DJ. Cancer of the penis. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Sanders; 2014:chap 85. National Cancer Institute. Penile cancer treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. Updated February 18, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/penile/hp/penile-treatment-pdq#link/_1 . Accessed October 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): penile cancer. Updated June 27, 2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/penile.pdf . Accessed October 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Genital warts 
 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Penis Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia