
 Primary lymphoma of the brain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Primary lymphoma of the brain is cancer of white blood cells that starts in the brain. Causes 
 
 The cause of primary brain lymphoma is not known.  People with a weakened immune system are at high risk for primary lymphoma of the brain. Common causes of a weakened immune system include HIV/AIDS and having had an organ transplant (especially heart transplant). Primary lymphoma of the brain may be linked to Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), especially in people with HIV/AIDS. EBV is the virus that causes  mononucleosis . Primary brain lymphoma is more common in people ages 45 to 70. The rate of primary brain lymphoma is rising. But this cancer is still very rare. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of primary brain lymphoma may include any of the following: Changes in speech or vision Confusion or  hallucinations Fever Headaches  or  seizures Leaning to 1 side when walking Weakness in hands or loss of coordination Numbness  to hot, cold, and pain Personality changes Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be done to help diagnose a primary lymphoma of the brain: Biopsy  of the brain Head CT scan  or  MRI Spinal tap  (lumbar puncture) Treatment 
 
 Primary lymphoma of the brain is usually first treated with corticosteroids. These medicines are used to control swelling and improve symptoms. The main treatment is with  chemotherapy . Younger people may receive high-dose chemotherapy, possibly followed by an  autologous stem cell transplant . Radiation therapy  of the whole brain may be done after chemotherapy. Boosting the immune system, such as in those with HIV, may also be tried. You and your health care provider may need to manage other concerns during your treatment, including: Having chemotherapy at home Managing your pets  during chemotherapy Bleeding problems Dry mouth Eating enough calories Safe eating  during cancer treatment Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, people with primary brain lymphoma survive for less than 2 months. Those treated with chemotherapy often survive 3 to 4 years or more. This depends on whether the tumor stays in remission. Survival may improve with autologous stem cell transplant. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications include: Chemotherapy side effects, including low blood counts Radiation side effects, including confusion, headaches, nervous system (neurologic) problems, and tissue death Return (recurrence) of the lymphoma Alternative Names 
 
 Brain lymphoma; Cerebral lymphoma; Primary lymphoma of the central nervous system; Lymphoma - brain Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Baehring JM, Hovhberg FH. Primary nervous system tumors in adults. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 74. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Version 2.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nhl.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Cancer Institute. PDQ primary CNS lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated April 2, 2015.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/primary-CNS-lymphoma/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Malignancy 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia