
 Prostate cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Prostate cancer is cancer that starts in the prostate gland. The prostate is a small, walnut-shaped structure that makes up part of a man's reproductive system. It wraps around the urethra, the tube that carries urine out of the body. Causes 
 
 Prostate cancer is the most common cause of death from cancer in men over age 75. Prostate cancer is rarely found in men younger than 40. People who are at high risk include: African American men, who are also more likely to develop this cancer at every age Men who are older than 60 Men who have a father or brother with prostate cancer  Other people at risk include: Men who have been around Agent Orange Men who use too much alcohol Farmers Men who eat a diet high in fat, especially animal fat Obese men Tire plant workers Painters Men who have been around cadmium  Prostate cancer is less common in people who do not eat meat (vegetarians). A common problem in almost all men as they grow older is an  enlarged prostate . This is called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH. It does not raise your risk of prostate cancer. But, it can increase your  prostate-specific antigen  (PSA) blood test result. Symptoms 
 
 With early prostate cancer, there are often no symptoms. The PSA blood test may done to screen men for prostate cancer. Often, PSA level rises before there are any symptoms.  The symptoms listed below can occur with prostate cancer as it grows larger in the prostate. These symptoms can also be caused by other prostate problems: Delayed or  slowed start of urinary stream Dribbling or leakage of urine, most often after urinating Slow urinary stream Straining when urinating, or not being able to empty all of the urine Blood in the urine or semen When the cancer has spread, there may be bone pain or tenderness, most often in the lower back and pelvic bones. Exams and Tests 
 
 An abnormal  digital rectal exam  may be the only sign of prostate cancer.  A  biopsy  is needed to tell if you have prostate cancer. A biopsy is a procedure to remove a sample of tissue from the prostate. The sample is sent to a lab for examination. It will be done in your doctor's office. Your doctor may recommend a biopsy if: You have a high  PSA  level A digital rectal exam reveals a hard or uneven surface  The biopsy result is reported using what is called a Gleason grade and a Gleason score. The Gleason grade tells you how fast the cancer might spread. It grades tumors on a scale of 1 through 5. You may have different grades of cancer in one biopsy sample. The two most common grades are added together. This gives you the Gleason score. The higher your Gleason score, the more likely the cancer can spread beyond the prostate: Scores 2 through 5: Low-grade prostate cancer. Scores 6 through 7: Intermediate- (or in the middle) grade cancer. Most prostate cancers fall into this group. Scores 8 through 10: High-grade cancer.  The following tests may be done to determine whether the cancer has spread: CT scan Bone scan MRI scan The PSA blood test will also be used to monitor your cancer after treatment.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on many things, including your Gleason score and your overall health. Your doctor will discuss your treatment options with you. If the cancer has not spread outside the prostate gland, common treatments include:  Surgery ( radical prostatectomy ) Radiation therapy , including  brachytherapy  and  proton therapy If you are older, your doctor may recommend simply monitoring the cancer with PSA tests and biopsies. Hormone therapy is mainly used for cancer that has spread beyond the prostate. It helps relieve symptoms and prevents further growth and spread of the cancer. But it does not cure the cancer. If prostate cancer spreads even after hormone therapy, surgery, or radiation has been tried, treatment may include: Chemotherapy Immunotherapy (medicine to trigger the immune system to attack and kill cancer cells)  Surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy can affect your sexual performance. Problems with urine control are possible after surgery and radiation therapy. Discuss your concerns with your health care provider. After treatment for prostate cancer, you will be closely watched to make sure the cancer does not spread. This involves routine checkups, including PSA blood tests (usually every 3 months to 1 year).  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  prostate cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on whether the cancer has spread outside the prostate gland and how abnormal the cancer cells are (the Gleason score) when you are diagnosed. A cure is possible if the cancer has not spread. Hormone treatment can improve survival, even if a cure is not possible. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of PSA screening with your health care provider. Prevention 
 
 Talk with your provider about possible ways to lower your risk of prostate cancer. These may include lifestyle measures, such as diet and exercise.  There are no medicines approved by the FDA for preventing prostate cancer. Alternative Names 
 
 Cancer - prostate; Biopsy - prostate; Prostate biopsy; Gleason score Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male urinary tract 
 BPH 
 Prostate cancer 
 PSA blood test 
 Prostatectomy  - Series 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) - Series 
 References 
 
 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.  PSA testing for the pretreatment staging and posttreatment management of prostate cancer: 2013 Revision of 2009 Best Practice Statement . Linthicum, MD: American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. 2013. Available at: www.auanet.org/common/pdf/education/clinical-guidance/Prostate-Specific-Antigen.pdf. Accessed October 2, 2015. Eastham JA, Scardino PT. Expectant management of prostate cancer. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Patin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 101. Loeb S, Carter HB. Early detection, diagnosis, and staging of prostate cancer. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 99. National Cancer Institute: PDQ Prostate Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified August 7, 2015. Available at: www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/prostate/HealthProfessional. Accessed October 2, 2015. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): Prostate cancer. Version 1.2015. Available at: www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/prostate.pdf. Accessed October 2, 2015. Nelson WG, Carter HB, DeWeese TL, Eisenberger MA. Prostate cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Dorshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 84. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Enlarged prostate 
 Prostate brachytherapy  
 Testosterone 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pelvic radiation - discharge 
 Prostate brachytherapy - discharge  
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Radical prostatectomy - discharge 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Prostate Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia