
 Stomach cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stomach cancer is cancer that starts in the stomach. Causes 
 
 Several types of cancer can occur in the stomach. The most common type is called adenocarcinoma. It starts from one of the cell types found in the lining of the stomach. Adenocarcinoma is a common  cancer  of the digestive tract. It is not very common in the United States. It is diagnosed much more often in people in eastern Asia, parts of South America, and eastern and central Europe. It occurs most often in men over age 40. The number of people in the United States who develop this cancer has decreased over the years. Experts think this decrease may be in part because people are eating less salted, cured, and smoked foods. You are more likely to be diagnosed with gastric cancer if you:  Have a diet low in fruits and vegetables Have a family history of gastric cancer Have an infection of the stomach by a bacteria called  Helicobacter pylori Had a polyp (abnormal growth) larger than 2 centimeters in your stomach Have inflammation and swelling of the stomach for a long time (chronic atrophic  gastritis ) Have  pernicious anemia  (low number of red blood cells from intestines not properly absorbing vitamin B12) Smoke  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of stomach cancer may include any of the following: Abdominal fullness or pain, which may occur after a small meal Dark stools Difficulty swallowing, which becomes worse over time Excessive belching General decline in health Loss of appetite Nausea Vomiting blood Weakness or fatigue Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Diagnosis is often delayed because symptoms may not occur in the early stages of the disease. And many of the symptoms do not specifically point to stomach cancer. So, people often self-treat symptoms that gastric cancer has in common with other, less serious, disorders (bloating, gas, heartburn, and fullness). Tests that can help diagnose gastric cancer include: Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for  anemia. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) with  biopsy  to examine the stomach tissue. EGD involves putting a tiny camera down the esophagus (food tube) to look at the inside of the stomach. Stool test  to check for blood in the stools.  Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the stomach ( gastrectomy ) is the standard treatment that can cure adenocarcinoma of the stomach.  Radiation therapy  and  chemotherapy  may help. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy after surgery may improve the chance of a cure. For people who cannot have surgery, chemotherapy or radiation may improve symptoms and may prolong survival, but may not cure the cancer. For some people, a surgical bypass procedure may relieve symptoms. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook varies based on how much the cancer has spread by the time of diagnosis. Tumors in the lower stomach are cured more often than those in the higher stomach. Chance of a cure also depends on how far the tumor has invaded the stomach wall and whether lymph nodes are involved. When the tumor has spread outside the stomach, a cure is less likely. When a cure is not possible, the goal of treatment is to improve symptoms and prolong life. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms of gastric cancer develop. Prevention 
 
 Screening programs are successful in detecting disease in the early stages in parts of the world where the risk of stomach cancer is much higher than in the United States. The value of screening in the United States and other countries with much lower rates of stomach cancer is not clear. The following may help reduce your risk of stomach cancer: DO NOT smoke. Keep a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables. Take medicines to treat  reflux disease (heartburn) , if you have it. Take antibiotics if you are diagnosed with  H pylori  infection.  Alternative Names 
 
 Cancer - stomach; Gastric cancer; Gastric carcinoma; Adenocarcinoma of the stomach Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Stomach cancer, x-ray 
 Stomach 
 Gastrectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Abrams JA, Quante M. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach and other gastric tumors. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 54. Gunderson LL, Donohue JH, Alberts SR. Ashman JB, Jaroszewski DE, eds. Cancer of the stomach and gastroesophageal junction. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 75. National Cancer Institute. Gastric cancer treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. Updated June 30, 2016.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/gastric/HealthProfessional . Accessed December 21, 2016. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Gastritis 
 Malignancy 
 Pernicious anemia 
 
 Review Date 11/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Stomach Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia