
 Throat or larynx cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Throat cancer is cancer of the vocal cords, larynx (voice box), or other areas of the throat. Causes 
 
 People who smoke or use tobacco are at risk of developing throat cancer. Drinking too much alcohol over a long time also increases risk. Smoking and drinking alcohol combined lead to an increased risk for throat cancer. Most throat cancers develop in adults older than 50. Men are more likely than women to develop throat cancer. Watch this video about: Cancer of the throat or larynx Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of throat cancer include any of the following: Abnormal (high-pitched) breathing sounds Cough Coughing up blood Difficulty swallowing Hoarseness that does not get better in 3 to 4 weeks Neck or ear pain Sore throat that does not get better in 2 to 3 weeks, even with antibiotics Swelling or lumps in the neck Weight loss not due to dieting  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show a lump on the outside of the neck. The provider may look in your throat or nose using a flexible tube with a small camera at the end.  Other tests that may be ordered include: Biopsy  of suspected tumor Chest x-ray CT scan of chest CT scan of head and neck MRI of the head or neck PET scan Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to completely remove the cancer and prevent it from spreading to other parts of the body. When the tumor is small, either surgery or  radiation therapy  alone can be used to remove the tumor. When the tumor is larger or has spread to lymph nodes in the neck, a combination of radiation and  chemotherapy  is often used to save the voice box (vocal cords). If this is not possible, the voice box is removed. This surgery is called  laryngectomy . Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Throat cancers may be cured when detected early. If the cancer has spread ( metastasized ) to surrounding tissues or lymph nodes in the neck, about half of patients can be cured. If the cancer has spread to parts of the body outside the head and neck, the cancer is not curable. Treatment is aimed at prolonging and improving quality of life. After treatment, therapy is needed to help with speech and swallowing. If the person is not able to swallow, a feeding tube will be needed. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of this type of cancer may include: Airway obstruction Difficulty swallowing Disfigurement of the neck or face Hardening of the skin of the neck Loss of voice  and speaking ability Spread of the cancer to other body areas (metastasis) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of throat cancer, especially hoarseness or a change in voice with no obvious cause that lasts longer than 3 weeks You find a lump in your neck that does not go away in 3 weeks Prevention 
 
 Do not smoke or use other tobacco. Limit or avoid alcohol use. Alternative Names 
 
 Vocal cord cancer; Throat cancer; Laryngeal cancer; Cancer of the glottis; Cancer of oropharynx or hypopharynx Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Oropharynx 
 References 
 
 Armstrong WB, Vokes DE, Verma SP. Malignant tumors of the larynx. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 106. National Cancer Institute. PDQ laryngeal cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified: July 23, 2014. Available at:  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/laryngeal/HealthProfessional . Accessed: January 4, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): Head and neck cancers. Version 1.2015. Available at:  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-neck.pdf . Accessed: January 4, 2016. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Hoarseness  
 Laryngectomy 
 Metastasis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Dry mouth during cancer treatment 
 Mouth and neck radiation - discharge 
 Swallowing problems  
 Review Date 10/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Throat Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia