
 Thyroid cancer - papillary carcinoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid is the most common cancer of the thyroid gland. The thyroid gland is located inside the front of the lower neck. Causes 
 
 About 80% of all thyroid cancers diagnosed in the United States are the papillary carcinoma type. It is more common in women than in men. It may occur in childhood, but is most often seen in adults between ages 30 and 50. The cause of this cancer is unknown. A genetic defect may be involved. Radiation increases the risk of developing thyroid cancer. Exposure may occur from: High-dose external radiation treatments to the neck, especially during childhood, used to treat childhood cancer or some noncancerous childhood conditions Radiation exposure from nuclear plant disasters  Radiation given through a vein (through an IV) during medical tests and treatments does not increase the risk of developing thyroid cancer. Symptoms 
 
 Thyroid cancer often begins as a small lump (nodule) in the thyroid gland. While some small lumps may be cancer, most (90%) thyroid nodules are harmless and are not cancerous. Most of the time, there are no other symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 If you have a lump on your thyroid, your doctor will order blood tests and possibly an  ultrasound  of the thyroid gland. If the ultrasound shows that the lump is bigger than 1 centimeter, a special procedure called a  fine needle aspiration  biopsy (FNAB) will be performed. This test helps determine if the lump is cancerous. Thyroid function tests  are often normal in people with thyroid cancer. Treatment 
 
 There are 3 types of thyroid cancer treatment: 
   Surgery
    
   Radioactive iodine
    Medicine Surgery is done to remove as much of the cancer as possible. The bigger the lump, the more of the thyroid gland must be removed. Often, the entire gland is taken out. After the surgery, you may receive radioiodine therapy, which is often taken by mouth. This substance kills any remaining thyroid tissue. It also helps make medical images clearer, so doctors can see if there is any cancer left behind or if it comes back later. If surgery is not an option, external radiation therapy can be useful. After surgery or radioiodine therapy, you will need to take medicine called levothyroxine for the rest of your life. This replaces the hormone the thyroid would normally make. You'll likely need to have a blood test every 6 to 12 months to check thyroid hormone levels. Other follow-up tests that may be done after treatment for thyroid cancer include: Ultrasound of the thyroid An imaging test called a  radioactive iodine (I-131) uptake scan Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The survival rate for papillary thyroid cancer is excellent. More than 95% of adults with this cancer survive at least 10 years. The prognosis is better for people who are younger than 40 and for those with smaller tumors. The following factors may decrease the survival rate: Older than 45 Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body Cancer that has spread to soft tissue Large tumor  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Accidental removal of the parathyroid gland, which helps regulate blood calcium levels Damage to a nerve that controls the vocal cords Spreading of cancer to lymph nodes (rare) Spreading of cancer to other sites ( metastasis ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a lump in your neck. Alternative Names 
 
 Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Thyroid cancer - CT scan 
 Thyroid cancer - CT scan 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute: PDQ thyroid cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Last modified February 4, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/thyroid/HealthProfessional . Accessed April 4, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: Thyroid carcinoma. Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/thyroid.pdf . Accessed April 4, 2016. Schneider DF, Mazeh H, Lubner SJ, Jaume JC, Chen H. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 71. Read More 
 
 Anaplastic thyroid cancer 
 Cancer 
 Metastasis 
 Thyroid cancer 
 Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia