
 Child abuse - physical 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Physical child abuse is a serious problem. Here are some facts: A report of child abuse happens every 10 seconds. Five children die each day from child abuse. Most children who die from abuse are under 3 years old. Most children are abused at home or by someone they know. They often love this person, or are afraid of them, so they do not tell anyone. Child abuse can happen to a child of any race, religion, or economic status.  HELP AN ABUSED CHILD Learn about the signs of child abuse. Recognize when a child might be abused. Get early help for abused children. If you think a child is being abused, contact a health care provider, the police, or child protective services in your city, county or state. Call 911 for any child in immediate danger because of abuse or neglect. You can also call Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline 1-800-4-A-CHILD (1-800-422-4453). Crisis counselors are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Interpreters are available to help in 170 languages. The counselor on the phone can help you figure out what steps to take next. All calls are anonymous and confidential. Other types of child abuse are: Neglect and emotional abuse Sexual abuse Shaken baby syndrome PHYSICAL CHILD ABUSE Physical child abuse is when a person physically hurts a child. The abuse is not an accident. Here are some examples of physical child abuse: Hitting and beating a child Hitting a child with an object, such as a belt or a stick Kicking a child Burning a child with hot water, a cigarette, or an iron Holding a child under water Tying up a child Severely shaking a baby Symptoms 
 
 SIGNS OF PHYSICAL ABUSE Signs of physical abuse in a child include: Sudden change in behavior or school performance Alertness, watching for something bad to happen Acting out behavior Leaving home early, going home late, and not wanting to go home Fear when approached by adults Other signs include unexplained injuries or a strange explanation of injuries, such as: Black eyes  Broken bones that cannot be explained. For example, infants who do not crawl or walk usually do not have broken bones. Bruise marks shaped like hands, fingers, or objects (such as a belt) Bruises that cannot be explained by usual child activities Bulging fontanelle  (soft spot) or  separated sutures  in an infant's skull Burn marks, such as cigarette burns Choke marks around the neck Circular marks around the wrists or ankles from twisting or being tied up Human bite marks Lash marks Unexplained unconsciousness in an infant Warning signs that an adult that may be abusing a child: Cannot explain or gives strange explanations for a child's injuries Talks about the child in a negative way Uses harsh discipline Was abused as a child Alcohol or drug problems Emotional problems or mental illness High stress Does not look after the child's hygiene or care Does not seem to love or have concern for the child Treatment 
 
 GETTING HELP FOR THE CHILD AND FAMILY The child may need medical treatment and counseling. Abused children can be seriously hurt. Children may also have emotional problems. Counseling and support groups  are available for children and for abusive parents who want to get help. There are state and other government departments or agencies that are responsible for the protection of children younger than age 18. Child protection agencies usually make a decision whether the child should go into foster care or can return home. Child protection agencies generally make every effort to reunite families when possible. The system varies from state to state, but usually involves a family court or a court that handles child abuse cases. Alternative Names 
 
 Battered child syndrome; Physical abuse - children References 
 
 Berkowitz CD, Stewart ST. Child maltreatment. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 66. Dubowitz H, Lane WG. Abused and neglected children. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 37. Read More 
 
 Child neglect and emotional abuse 
 Subdural hematoma  
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Child Abuse 
 Browse the Encyclopedia