
 Cyclothymic disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cyclothymic disorder is a mental disorder. It is a mild form of  bipolar disorder  (manic depressive illness), in which a person has mood swings over a period of years that go from mild  depression  to emotional highs. Causes 
 
 The causes of cyclothymic disorder are unknown. Major depression, bipolar disorder, and cyclothymia often occur together in families. This suggests that these mood disorders share similar causes. Cyclothymia usually begins early in life. Men and women are equally affected. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Periods (episodes) of extreme happiness and high activity or energy (mania), or low mood, activity, or energy (depression) for at least 2 years (1 or more years in children and adolescents) Mood swings (these are less severe than in bipolar disorder or major depression) Ongoing symptoms, with no more than 2 symptom-free months in a row  Exams and Tests 
 
 The diagnosis is usually based on your mood history. Your health care provider may order blood and urine tests to rule out medical causes of mood swings. Treatment 
 
 Treatments for this disorder include mood-stabilizing medicine, antidepressants, talk therapy, or some combination of these three treatments. Some of the more commonly used mood stabilizers are lithium and antiseizure medicines. Some people with cyclothymia may not respond to medicines as well as people with bipolar disorder. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of living with cyclothymic disorder by joining a  support group  whose members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Less than half of people with cyclothymic disorder go on to develop bipolar disorder. In other people, cyclothymia continues as a chronic condition or disappears with time. Possible Complications 
 
 The condition can progress to bipolar disorder. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call a mental health professional if you or a loved one has alternating periods of depression and excitement that do not go away and that affect work, school, or social life. Seek help right away if you or a loved one is having thoughts of suicide. Alternative Names 
 
 Cyclothymia; Mood disorder - cyclothymia References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Cyclothymic disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013:139-141. Fava M, Ostergaard SD, Cassano P. Mood disorders: depressive disorders (major depressive disorder). In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 29. Read More 
 
 Bipolar disorder  
 
 Review Date 7/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia