
 Failure to thrive 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Failure to thrive refers to children whose current weight or rate of weight gain is much lower than that of other children of similar age and gender. Causes 
 
 Failure to thrive may be caused by medical problems or factors in the child’s environment, such as abuse or neglect. There are many medical causes of failure to thrive. These include: Problems with genes, such as  Down syndrome Organ problems Hormone problems Damage to the brain or central nervous system, which may cause feeding difficulties in an infant Heart or lung problems, which can affect how nutrients move through the body Anemia  or other blood disorders Gastrointestinal problems that make it hard to absorb nutrients or cause a lack of digestive enzymes Long-term (chronic) infections Metabolism  problems Problems during pregnancy or low birth weight Factors in the child's environment include: Loss of emotional bond between parent and child Poverty Problems with child-caregiver relationship Parents do not understand the appropriate diet needs for their child Exposure to infections, parasites, or toxins Poor eating habits, such as eating in front of the television and not having formal meal times Many times, the cause cannot be determined. Symptoms 
 
 Children who fail to thrive do not  grow and develop normally  as compared to children of the same age. They seem to be much smaller or shorter. Teenagers may not have the usual changes that occur at puberty. Symptoms of failure to thrive include: Height, weight, and  head circumference  do not match standard growth charts Weight is lower than 3rd percentile of standard growth charts or 20% below the ideal weight for their height Growth may have slowed or stopped The following may be delayed or slow to develop in children who fail to thrive: Physical skills, such as rolling over, sitting, standing and walking Mental and social skills Secondary sexual characteristics (delayed in adolescents) Babies who fail to gain weight or develop often lack interest in feeding or have a problem receiving the proper amount of nutrition. This is called poor feeding. Other symptoms that may be seen in a child that fails to thrive include: Constipation Excessive crying Excessive sleepiness (lethargy) Irritability Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and check the child's height, weight, and body shape. Parents will be asked about the child's medical and family history. A special test called the Denver Developmental Screening Test will be used to show any delays in development. A growth chart outlining all types of growth since birth is created. The following tests may be done: Complete blood count  (CBC) Electrolyte balance Hemoglobin electrophoresis  to check for conditions such as sickle cell disease Hormone studies , including thyroid function tests X-rays to determine bone age Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the delayed growth and development. Delayed growth due to nutritional problems can be helped by showing the parents how to provide a well-balanced diet. Do not give your child dietary supplements such as Boost or Ensure without talking to your health care provider first. Other treatment depends on how severe the condition is. The following may be recommended: Increase the number of calories and amount of fluid the infant receives Correct any vitamin or mineral deficiencies Identify and treat any other medical conditions The child may need to stay in the hospital for a little while. Treatment may also involve improving the family relationships and living conditions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Normal growth and development may be affected if a child fails to thrive for a long time. Normal growth and development may continue if the child has failed to thrive for a short time, and the cause is determined and treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Permanent mental, emotional, or physical delays can occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if your child does not seem to be developing normally. Prevention 
 
 Regular checkups can help detect failure to thrive in children. Alternative Names 
 
 Growth failure; FTT; Feeding disorder; Poor feeding References 
 
 Marcdente KJ, Kliegman RM. Failure to thrive. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 21. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Central nervous system 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Chromosome 
 Delayed growth 
 Endocrine glands 
 Growth hormone deficiency - children 
 Malabsorption 
 Metabolism 
 Normal growth and development 
 Short stature 
 Toxins 
 Turner syndrome 
 Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Enteral nutrition - child - managing problems 
 Gastrostomy feeding tube - bolus 
 Jejunostomy feeding tube  
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Growth Disorders 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia