
 Schizoid personality disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Schizoid personality disorder is a mental condition in which a person has a lifelong pattern of indifference to others and social isolation. Causes 
 
 Cause of this disorder is unknown. It may be related to  schizophrenia  and shares many of the same risk factors. Schizoid personality disorder is not as disabling as schizophrenia. It doesn't cause the disconnection from reality (in the form of  hallucinations  or delusions) that occurs in schizophrenia. Symptoms 
 
 A person with schizoid personality disorder often: Appears distant and detached Avoids social activities that involve emotional closeness with other people Does not want or enjoy close relationships, even with family members  Exams and Tests 
 
 This disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. Treatment 
 
 People with this disorder will often not seek treatment. For this reason, little is known about which treatments work. Talk therapy may not be effective. This is because people with this disorder may have a hard time forming a good working relationship with a therapist. One approach that seems to help is to put fewer demands for emotional closeness or intimacy on the person. People with schizoid personality disorder often do well in relationships that don't focus on emotional closeness. They tend to be better at handling relationships that focus on:  Work Intellectual activities Expectations  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Schizoid personality disorder is a long-term (chronic) illness that usually does not improve much over time. Social isolation often prevents the person from asking for help or support. Limiting expectations of emotional intimacy may help people with this condition make and keep connections with other people. Alternative Names 
 
 Personality disorder - schizoid References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Schizoid personality disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013:652-655. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Hopwood CJ. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder 
 Personality disorders 
 
 Review Date 7/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia