
 Absent menstrual periods - secondary 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Absence of a woman's monthly menstrual period is called amenorrhea. Secondary amenorrhea is when a woman who has been having normal menstrual cycles stops getting her periods for 6 months or longer. Causes 
 
 Secondary amenorrhea can occur due to natural changes in the body. For example, the most common cause of secondary amenorrhea is pregnancy. Breastfeeding and menopause are also common, but natural, causes. Women who take birth control pills or who receive hormone shots such as Depo-Provera may not have any monthly bleeding. When they stop taking these hormones, their periods may not return for more than 6 months. You are more likely to have absent periods if you: Are obese Exercise too much and for long periods of time Have very low body fat (less than 15 to 17%) Have severe anxiety or emotional distress Lose a lot of weight suddenly (for example, from strict or extreme diets or after  gastric bypass surgery )  Other causes include: Brain (pituitary) tumors Drugs for cancer treatment Drugs to treat  schizophrenia  or psychosis Overactive thyroid gland Polycystic ovarian syndrome Reduced function of the ovaries  Also, procedures such as a dilation and curettage ( D and C ) can cause scar tissue to form. This tissue may cause a woman to stop menstruating. This is called  Asherman syndrome . Scarring may also be caused by some severe pelvic infections. Symptoms 
 
 In addition to having no menstrual periods, other symptoms can include: Breast size changes Weight gain  or  weight loss Discharge from the breast or change in breast size Acne and increased hair growth in a male pattern Vaginal dryness Voice changes  If amenorrhea is caused by a pituitary tumor, there may be other symptoms related to the tumor, such as vision loss and  headache . Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam and pelvic exam must be done to check for pregnancy. A  pregnancy test  will be done. Blood tests may be done to check hormone levels, including: Estradiol levels Follicle stimulating hormone  (FSH level) Luteinizing hormone  (LH level) Prolactin level Serum  hormone levels , such as  testosterone  levels Thyroid stimulating hormone  (TSH)  Other tests that may be performed include: CT scan  or  MRI scan of the head  to look for tumors Biopsy of the lining of the uterus Genetic testing Ultrasound of the pelvis or  hysterosonogram  (pelvic ultrasound that involves putting saline solution inside the uterus)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of amenorrhea. Normal monthly periods most often return after the condition is treated. A lack of menstrual period due to  obesity , vigorous exercise, or weight loss may respond to a change in exercise routine or weight control (gain or loss, as needed). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause of amenorrhea. Many of the conditions that cause secondary amenorrhea will respond to treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your primary health care provider or women's health care provider if you have missed more than one period so that you can get diagnosed and treated, if needed. Alternative Names 
 
 Amenorrhea - secondary; No periods - secondary; Absent periods - secondary; Absent menses - secondary; Absence of periods - secondary Images 
 
 
 Secondary amenorrhea 
 Normal uterine anatomy (cut section) 
 Absence of menstruation (amenorrhea) 
 References 
 
 Bulun SE. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Crane RT, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Ferri FF. Amenorrhea. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:100-103.e2. Lobo RA. Primary and secondary amenorrhea and precocious puberty: etiology, diagnostic evaluation, management. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 38. Read More 
 
 D and C 
 Incidence 
 Menopause 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Menstruation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia