
 Ovarian hypofunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ovarian hypofunction is reduced function of the ovaries (including decreased production of hormones). Causes 
 
 Ovarian hypofunction may be caused by genetic factors such as chromosome abnormalities. It may also occur with certain autoimmune disorders that disrupt the normal function of the ovaries. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can also cause ovarian hypofunction. Symptoms 
 
 Women with ovarian hypofunction may develop symptoms of menopause, which include:  Hot flashes Irregular or absent periods Mood swings Night sweats Vaginal dryness  Ovarian hypofunction may also make it hard for a woman to become pregnant. Exams and Tests 
 
 A blood test will be done to check your level of follicle-stimulating hormone, or  FSH . FSH levels are higher than normal in women with ovarian hypofunction. Other blood tests may be done to look for autoimmune disorders or thyroid disease. Women with ovarian hypofunction who want to become pregnant may be concerned about their ability to conceive. Those younger than age 30 may have a chromosome analysis to check for problems. In most cases, older women who are close to menopause do not need this test. Treatment 
 
 Estrogen therapy often helps relieve menopausal symptoms and prevents bone loss. However, it will not increase your chances of becoming pregnant. Fewer than 1 in 10 women with ovarian hypofunction will be able to get pregnant. The chance of getting pregnant increases to 50% when you use a fertilized donor egg (an egg from another woman). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You are no longer having monthly periods. You have symptoms of early menopause. You are having difficulty becoming pregnant. Alternative Names 
 
 Premature ovarian failure; Ovarian insufficiency Images 
 
 
 Ovarian hypofunction 
 References 
 
 Broekmans FJ, Fauser BCJM. Female infertility. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Bulun SE. The physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Premature Ovarian Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia