
 Vaginal dryness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vaginal dryness is present when the tissues of the vagina are no longer well-lubricated and healthy.  Causes 
 
 Atrophic vaginitis is caused by a decrease in estrogen.  Estrogen keeps the tissues of the vagina lubricated and healthy. Normally, the lining of the vagina makes a clear, lubricating fluid. This fluid makes sexual intercourse more comfortable. It also helps decrease vaginal dryness. If estrogen levels drop off, the vaginal tissue shrinks and becomes thinner. This causes dryness and inflammation. Estrogen levels normally drop after menopause. The following may also cause estrogen levels to drop: Medicines or hormones used in the treatment of breast cancer, endometriosis, fibroids, or infertility Surgery to remove the ovaries Radiation treatment to the pelvic area Chemotherap. Severe stress, depression, or intense exercise Some women develop this problem right after childbirth or while breastfeeding. Estrogen levels are lower at these times. The  vagina can also become further irritated  from soaps, laundry detergents, lotions, perfumes, or douches. Certain medicines, smoking, tampons, and condoms may also cause or worsen vaginal dryness.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Burning on urination Light  bleeding  after intercourse Painful sexual intercourse Slight  vaginal discharge Vaginal soreness,  itching  or burning  Exams and Tests 
 
 A pelvic exam shows that the walls of the vagina are thin, pale or red.  Your vaginal discharge may be tested to rule out other causes for the condition. You may also have hormone level tests to find out if you are in menopause. Treatment 
 
 There are many treatments for vaginal dryness. Before treating your symptoms on your own, a health care provider must determine the cause of the problem. Try using lubricants and  vaginal moisturizing creams . They will often moisten the area for several hours, up to a day. These can be bought without prescription.  Use a water-soluble vaginal lubricant during intercourse may help. Products with petroleum jelly, mineral oil, or other oils may damage latex condoms or diaphragms. Avoid scented soaps, lotions, perfumes, or douches. Prescription estrogen can work well to treat atrophic vaginitis. It is available as a cream, tablet, suppository, or ring. All of these are placed directly into the vagina. These medicines deliver estrogen directly to the vaginal area. Only a little estrogen is absorbed into the bloodstream. You may take estrogen ( hormone therapy ) in the form of a skin patch, or in a pill that you take by mouth if you have hot flashes or other symptoms of menopause. Women should discuss the risks and benefits of estrogen replacement therapy with their provider. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Proper treatment will ease symptoms most of the time. Possible Complications 
 
 Vaginal dryness can: Make you more likely to get yeast or bacterial infections of the vagina. Cause sores or cracks in the walls of the vagina. Cause pain with sexual intercourse, which may affect your relationship with your partner or spouse. (Talking openly with your partner may help.)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have vaginal dryness or soreness, burning, itching, or painful sexual intercourse that does not go away when you use a water-soluble lubricant. Alternative Names 
 
 Vaginitis - atrophic; Vaginitis due to reduced estrogen; Atrophic vaginitis; Menopause vaginal dryness Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Causes of painful intercourse 
 Uterus 
 Normal uterine anatomy (cut section) 
 References 
 
 Eckert LO, Lentz G. Infections of the lower and upper genital tracts. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Grady D, Barrett-Connor E. Menopause. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 240. Lobo RA. Menopasue and care of the mature woman. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Menopause 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexual Problems in Women 
 Vaginal Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia