
 Vaginismus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vaginismus is a spasm of the muscles surrounding the  vagina  that occurs against your will. The spasms close the vagina and can prevent sexual activity and medical exams.  Causes 
 
 Vaginismus is a  sexual problem . It has several possible causes, including:  Past sexual trauma or abuse Mental health factors A response that develops due to physical pain Intercourse Sometimes no cause can be found. Vaginismus is an uncommon condition.  Symptoms 
 
 The main symptoms are: Difficult or painful vaginal penetration during sex. Vaginal penetration may not be possible. Vaginal pain during sexual intercourse or a pelvic exam. Women with vaginismus often become anxious about sexual intercourse. This does not mean they cannot become sexually aroused. Many women with this problem can have orgasms when the clitoris is stimulated. Exams and Tests 
 
 A pelvic exam can confirm the diagnosis. A medical history and complete physical exam are needed to look for other causes of pain with sexual intercourse (dyspareunia). Treatment 
 
 A health care team made up of a gynecologist, physical therapist, and sexual counselor can help with treatment. Treatment involves a combination of physical therapy, education, counseling, and exercises such as pelvic floor muscle contraction and relaxation ( Kegel exercises ). Vaginal dilation exercises using plastic dilators are recommended. This method helps to make the person less sensitive to vaginal penetration. These exercises should be done under the direction of a sex therapist, physical therapist, or other health care provider. Therapy should involve the partner and can slowly lead to more intimate contact. Intercourse may ultimately be possible. You will get information from your provider. Topics may include: Sexual anatomy Sexual response cycle Common myths about sex  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Women who are treated by a sex therapy specialist can very often overcome this problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Sexual dysfunction - vaginismus Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Causes of painful intercourse 
 Uterus 
 Female reproductive anatomy (mid-sagittal) 
 References 
 
 Cowley D, Lentz GM. Emotional aspects of gynecology: depression, anxiety, PTSD, eating disorders, substance abuse, "difficult" patients, sexual function, rape, intimate partner violence, and grief. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 9. Swerdloff RS, Wang C. Sexual dysfunction. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 123. Read More 
 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexual Problems in Women 
 Browse the Encyclopedia