
 Aarskog syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aarskog syndrome is a disease that affects a person's height, muscles, skeleton, genitals, and appearance. It is passed down through families (inherited). Causes 
 
 Aarskog syndrome is a genetic disorder that is linked to the X chromosome. It affects mainly males, but females may have a milder form. The condition is caused by changes (mutations) in a gene called "faciogenital dysplasia" ( FGD1 ). Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of this condition include: Belly button that sticks out Bulge in the groin or scrotum Delayed sexual maturity Delayed teeth Downward  palpebral slant  to eyes (palpebral slant is the direction of the slant from the outer to inner corner of the eye) Hairline with a "widow's peak" Mildly sunken chest Mild to moderate mental problems Mild to moderate short height which may not be obvious until the child is 1 to 3 years old Poorly developed middle section of the face Rounded face Scrotum surrounds the penis (shawl scrotum) Short fingers and toes with mild webbing Single crease in the palm of the hand Small, broad hands and feet with short fingers and curved-in fifth finger Small nose with nostrils tipped forward Testicles that have not come down (undescended) Top portion of the ear folded over slightly Wide groove above the upper lip, crease below the lower lip Wide-set eyes with droopy eyelids  Exams and Tests 
 
 These tests may be done: Genetic testing for mutations in the  FGD1  gene X-rays  Treatment 
 
 Moving the teeth may be done to treat some of the abnormal facial features a person with Aarskog syndrome may have. Support Groups 
 
 The MAGIC Foundation for Children's Growth is a support group for Aarskog syndrome:  www.magicfoundation.org . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some people may have some mental slowness, but children with this condition often have good social skills. Some males may have problems with fertility. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Changes in the brain Difficulty growing in the first year of life Poorly aligned teeth Seizures Undescended testicles When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has delayed growth or if you notice any symptoms of Aarskog syndrome. Seek genetic counseling if you have a family history of Aarskog syndrome. Contact a genetic specialist if your provider thinks you or your child may have Aarskog syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Genetic testing may be available for people with a family history of the condition or a known mutation of the gene that causes it.
 Alternative Names 
 
 Facial-digital-genital syndrome Images 
 
 
 The face 
 Pectus excavatum 
 References 
 
 Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Moderate short stature, facial and genital. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap D. Read More 
 
 Seizures 
 Sex-linked recessive 
 Short stature 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cleft Lip and Palate 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Learning Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia