
 Aase syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aase syndrome is a rare disorder that involves  anemia  and certain joint and skeletal deformities. Causes 
 
 Many cases of Aase syndrome occur without a known reason and are not passed down through families (inherited). However, some cases (45%) have been shown to be inherited. These are due to a change in 1 of 9 genes important for making protein correctly (the genes make ribosomal proteins) This condition is similar to Diamond-Blackfan anemia, and the 2 conditions should not be separated. A missing piece on chromosome 19 is found in some people with Diamond-Blackfan anemia. The anemia in Aase syndrome is caused by poor development of the bone marrow, which is where blood cells are formed. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Absent or small knuckles Cleft palate Decreased skin creases at finger joints Deformed ears Droopy eyelids Inability to fully extend the joints from birth ( contracture deformity ) Narrow shoulders Pale skin Triple-jointed thumbs Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Bone marrow biopsy Complete blood count  (CBC) Echocardiogram X-rays Treatment 
 
 Treatment may involve blood transfusions in the first year of life to treat anemia.  A steroid medicine called prednisone has also been used to treat anemia associated with Aase syndrome. However, it should only be used after reviewing the benefits and risks with a provider who has experience treating anemias. A  bone marrow transplant  may be necessary if other treatment fails. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The anemia tends to improve with age. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications related to anemia include: Fatigue Decreased oxygen in the blood Weakness  Heart problems can lead to a variety of complications, depending on the specific defect. Severe cases of Aase syndrome have been associated with  stillbirth  or early death. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended if you have a family history of this syndrome and wish to become pregnant. Alternative Names 
 
 Aase-Smith syndrome; Hypoplastic anemia - triphalangeal thumbs, Aase-Smith type 
 References 
 
 Clinton C, Gazda HT. Diamond-Blackfan anemia.  Gene Reviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2014:9. PMID: 20301769  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301769 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Facial-limb defect as major feature. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap I. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Autosomal dominant 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia