
 Abdominal tap  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abdominal tap is used to remove fluid from the area between the belly wall and the spine. This space is called the abdominal cavity. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done in a health care provider's office, treatment room, or hospital. The puncture site will be cleaned and shaved, if necessary. You then receive a local numbing medicine. The tap needle is inserted 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5 cm) into the abdomen. Sometimes, a small cut is made to help insert the needle. The fluid is pulled out into a syringe. The needle is removed. A dressing is placed on the puncture site. If a cut was made, one or two stitches may be used to close it. Sometimes, ultrasound is used to guide the needle. An ultrasound uses sound waves to make the image and not x-rays. It does not hurt. There are 2 kinds of abdominal taps: Diagnostic tap. A small amount of fluid is taken and sent to the laboratory for testing Large volume tap. Several liters may be removed to relieve abdominal pain and fluid buildup  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Let your provider know if you: Have any allergies to medicines or numbing medicine Are taking any medicines (including herbal remedies) Have any bleeding problems Might be pregnant  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a slight sting from the numbing medicine, or pressure as the needle is inserted. If a large amount of fluid is taken out, you may feel dizzy or lightheaded. Tell the provider if you feel dizzy or lightheaded. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Normally, the abdominal cavity contains only a small amount of fluid. In certain conditions, large amounts of fluid can build up in this space. An abdominal tap can help diagnose the cause of fluid buildup or the presence of an infection. It may also be done to remove a large amount of fluid to reduce belly pain. Normal Results 
 
 Normally, there should be little or no fluid in the abdominal space. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An exam of abdominal fluid may show: Cancer that has spread to the abdominal cavity ( most often cancer of the ovaries ) Cirrhosis of the liver Damaged bowel Heart disease Infection Kidney disease Pancreatic disease  Risks 
 
 There is a slight chance that the needle could puncture the bowel, bladder, or a blood vessel in the abdomen. If a large quantity of fluid is removed, there is a slight risk of lowered blood pressure and kidney failure. There is also a slight chance of infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Peritoneal tap; Paracentesis; Ascites - abdominal tap; Cirrhosis - abdominal tap; Malignant ascites - abdominal tap Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Peritoneal sample 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tiso G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Runyon BA. Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Edema 
 Heart Failure 
 Kidney Tests 
 Liver Cancer 
 Liver Diseases 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Pancreatitis 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia