
 Abdominal rigidity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Abdominal rigidity is stiffness of the muscles in the belly area, which can be felt when touched or pressed. Considerations 
 
 When there is a sore area inside the belly or abdomen, the pain will get worse when a hand presses against your belly area. Your fear or nervousness about being touched (palpated) may cause this symptom, but there should be no pain. If you have pain when you are touched and you tighten the muscles to guard against more pain, it is more likely caused by a physical condition inside your body. The condition may affect one or both sides of your body. Abdominal rigidity may occur with: Abdominal tenderness Nausea Pain Swelling Vomiting Causes 
 
 Causes can include: Abscess inside the abdomen Appendicitis Cholecystitis  caused by gallstones Hole that develops through the entire wall of the stomach, small intestine, large bowel, or gallbladder ( gastrointestinal perforation ) Injury to the abdomen Peritonitis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical care right away if you have pain when the belly is gently pressed and then released.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 You will probably be seen in an emergency room. The health care provider will examine you. This may include a pelvic exam, and possibly a rectal exam. The provider will ask questions about your symptoms, such as: When did they first start? What other symptoms do you have at the same time? For example, do you have  abdominal pain ?  You may have the following tests: Barium studies of the stomach and intestines (such as an  upper GI series ) Blood tests Colonoscopy Gastroscopy Peritoneal lavage Stool studies Urine tests X-ray of the abdomen X-ray of the chest You will probably not be given any  pain relievers  until a diagnosis is made. Pain relievers can hide your symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Rigidity of the abdomen References 
 
 Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 134. Squires RA, Postier RG. Acute abdomen. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 47. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Browse the Encyclopedia