
 Abdominal MRI scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging scan is an imaging test that uses powerful magnets and radio waves. The waves create pictures of the inside of the belly area. It does not use radiation (x-rays). Single magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images are called slices. The images can be stored on a computer or printed on film. One exam produces dozens or sometimes hundreds of images. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You may be asked to wear a hospital gown or clothing without metal zippers or snaps (such as sweatpants and a t-shirt). Certain types of metal can cause blurry images. You will lie on a narrow table. The table slides into a large tunnel-shaped scanner. Some exams require a special dye (contrast). Most of the time, the dye is given before the test through a vein (IV) in your hand or forearm. The dye helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. During the MRI, the person who operates the machine will watch you from another room. The test lasts about 30 to 60 minutes, but it may take longer. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the scan. Tell your health care provider if you are afraid of close spaces (have claustrophobia). You may be given a medicine to help you feel sleepy and less anxious. Your provider may also suggest an open MRI, in which the machine is not as close to your body. Before the test, tell your provider if you have: Artificial heart valves Brain aneurysm clips Heart defibrillator or pacemaker Inner ear (cochlear) implants Kidney disease or dialysis (you may not be able to receive contrast) Recently placed artificial joints Certain types of vascular  stents Worked with sheet metal in the past (you may need tests to check for metal pieces in your eyes)  Because the MRI contains strong magnets, metal objects are not allowed into the room with the MRI scanner. Avoid carrying items such as: Pocketknives, pens, and eyeglasses Watches, credit cards, jewelry, and hearing aids Hairpins, metal zippers, pins, and similar items Removable dental implants  How the Test will Feel 
 
 An MRI exam causes no pain. You may get medicine to relax you if you have a problem lying still or are very nervous. Moving too much can blur MRI images and cause errors. The table may be hard or cold, but you can ask for a blanket or pillow. The machine makes loud thumping and humming noises when turned on. You can wear ear plugs to help reduce the noise. An intercom in the room allows you to speak to someone at any time. Some MRIs have televisions and special headphones to help you pass time. There is no recovery time, unless you were given a medicine to help you relax. After an MRI scan, you can go back to your normal diet, activity, and medicines. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 An abdominal MRI provides detailed pictures of the belly area from many views. It is often used to clarify findings from earlier x-rays or  CT  scans. This test may be used to look at: Blood flow in the abdomen Blood vessels in the abdomen The cause of abdominal pain or swelling The cause of abnormal blood test results, such as liver or kidney problems Lymph nodes in the abdomen Masses in the liver, kidneys, adrenals, pancreas, or spleen  MRI can distinguish tumors from normal tissues. This can help the doctor know more about the tumor such as size, severity, and spread. This is called staging. In some cases it can give better information about masses in the abdomen than CT. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result may be due to: Abdominal aortic aneurysm Abscess Cancer  or tumors that involves the adrenal glands, liver, gallbladder,  pancreas , kidneys, ureters, intestines Enlarged spleen  or liver Gallbladder or  bile  duct problems Hemangiomas Hydronephrosis  (kidney swelling from the backflow of urine) Kidney infection Kidney damage or diseases Kidney stones Enlarged lymph nodes Obstructed vena cava Portal vein obstruction (liver) Blockage or narrowing of the arteries that supply the kidneys Renal vein thrombosis Kidney or liver  transplant rejection Cirrhosis of the liver Spread of cancers that began outside the belly  Risks 
 
 MRI does not use ionizing radiation. No side effects from the magnetic fields and radio waves have been reported. The most common type of contrast (dye) used is gadolinium. It is very safe. Allergic reactions are rare but can occur. If you have a history of severe allergic reactions to other medicines you should notify your doctor. In addition, gadolinium can be harmful to people with kidney problems who need dialysis. Tell your provider before the test if you have kidney problems. The strong magnetic fields created during an MRI can cause heart pacemakers and other implants not to work as well. The magnets can also cause a piece of metal inside your body to move or shift. Alternative Names 
 
 Nuclear magnetic resonance - abdomen; NMR - abdomen; Magnetic resonance imaging - abdomen; MRI of the abdomen Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 MRI scans 
 References 
 
 Kim DH, Pickhard PJ. Diagnostic imaging procedures in gastroenterology. In: Goldman L, Schafter AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 133. Wilkinson ID, Graves MJ. Magnetic resonance imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 5. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open 
 Abscess 
 Acute arterial occlusion - kidney 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Adenomyosis 
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular 
 Arteriogram 
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 Bile 
 Birthmarks - red 
 Cancer 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 CT scan 
 Cystinuria 
 Gallstones 
 Hydatidiform mole 
 Hydronephrosis of one kidney 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Insulinoma 
 Kidney stones 
 Lymphofollicular hyperplasia 
 Medullary cystic kidney disease 
 MRI 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Noninvasive 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Pancreatic islet cell tumor 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Renal pelvis or ureter cancer 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Splenomegaly 
 SVC obstruction 
 Transplant rejection 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Adrenal Gland Cancer 
 Bile Duct Cancer 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Gallbladder Cancer 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Gallstones 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Kidney Cysts 
 Kidney Tests 
 Liver Cancer 
 Liver Diseases 
 MRI Scans 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Pancreatitis 
 Spleen Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia