
 Abdominal mass 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abdominal mass is swelling in one part of the belly area (abdomen). Considerations 
 
 An abdominal mass is most often found during a routine  physical exam . Most of the time the mass develops slowly. You may not be able to feel the mass. Locating the pain helps your health care provider make a diagnosis. For example, the abdomen can be divided into four areas: Right-upper quadrant Left-upper quadrant Right-lower quadrant Left-lower quadrant  Other terms used to find the location of abdominal pain or masses include: Epigastric -- center of the abdomen just below the rib cage Periumbilical -- area around the belly button  The location of the mass and its firmness, texture, and other qualities can provide clues to its cause. Causes 
 
 Several conditions can cause an abdominal mass: Abdominal aortic aneurysm  can cause a pulsating mass around the navel. Bladder distention  (urinary bladder over-filled with fluid) can cause a firm mass in the center of the lower abdomen above the pelvic bones. In extreme cases it can reach as far up as the navel. Cholecystitis  can cause a very tender mass that is felt below the liver in the right-upper quadrant (occasionally). Colon cancer  can cause a mass almost anywhere in the abdomen. Crohn's disease  or bowel obstruction can cause many tender, sausage-shaped masses anywhere in the abdomen. Diverticulitis  can cause a mass that is usually located in the left-lower quadrant. Gallbladder tumor can cause a tender, irregularly shaped mass in the right-upper quadrant. Hydronephrosis  (fluid-filled kidney) can cause a smooth, spongy-feeling mass in one or both sides or toward the back (flank area). Kidney cancer  can sometimes cause a mass in the abdomen. Liver cancer  can cause a firm, lumpy mass in the right upper quadrant. Liver enlargement  (hepatomegaly) can cause a firm, irregular mass below the right rib cage, or on the left side in the stomach area. Neuroblastoma , a cancerous tumor often found in the lower abdomen can cause a mass (this cancer mainly occurs in children and infants). Ovarian cyst  can cause a smooth, rounded, rubbery mass above the pelvis in the lower abdomen. Pancreatic abscess  can cause a mass in the upper abdomen in the epigastric area. Pancreatic pseudocyst  can cause a lumpy mass in the upper abdomen in the epigastric area. Renal cell carcinoma  can cause a smooth, firm, but not tender mass near the kidney (usually only affects one kidney). Spleen enlargement  (splenomegaly) can sometimes be felt in the left-upper quadrant. Stomach cancer  can cause a mass in the left-upper abdomen in the stomach area (epigastric) if the  cancer  is large. Uterine  leiomyoma  (fibroids) can cause a round, lumpy mass above the pelvis in the lower abdomen (sometimes can be felt if the fibroids are large). Volvulus  can cause a mass anywhere in the abdomen. Ureteropelvic junction obstruction  can cause a mass in the lower abdomen.  Home Care 
 
 All abdominal masses should be examined as soon as possible by the health care provider. Changing your body position may help relieve pain due to an abdominal mass. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help right away if you have a pulsating lump in your abdomen along with severe  abdominal pain . This could be a sign of a ruptured aortic aneurysm, which is an emergency condition. Contact your health care provider if you notice any type of abdominal mass. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 In nonemergency situations, your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. In an emergency situation, you will be stabilized first. Then, your provider will examine your abdomen and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history, such as: Where is the mass located? When did you notice the mass? Does it come and go? Has the mass changed in size or position? Has it become more or less painful? What other symptoms do you have?  A pelvic or rectal exam may be needed in some cases. Tests that may be done to find the cause of an abdominal mass include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal x-ray Angiography Barium enema Blood tests such as  CBC  and  blood chemistry Colonoscopy EGD Isotope study Sigmoidoscopy Alternative Names 
 
 Mass in the abdomen Images 
 
 
 Anatomical landmarks, front view 
 Digestive system 
 Fibroid tumors 
 Aortic aneurysm 
 References 
 
 Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 134. Squires RA, Postier RG. Acute abdomen. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 47. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Aneurysm 
 Physical examination 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Browse the Encyclopedia