
 Abdominal x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abdominal x-ray is an imaging test to look at organs and structures in the abdomen. Organs include the spleen, stomach, and intestines. When the test is done to look at the bladder and kidney structures, it is called a KUB (kidneys, ureters, bladder) x-ray. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital radiology department. Or it may done in the health care provider's office by an x-ray technologist. You lie on your back on the x-ray table. The x-ray machine is positioned over your abdominal area. You hold your breath as the picture is taken so that the picture will not be blurry. You may be asked to change position to the side or to stand up for additional pictures. Men will have a lead shield placed over the testes to protect against the radiation. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Before having the x-ray, tell the provider the following: If you are pregnant or think you could be pregnant Have an IUD inserted Have had a barium contrast x-ray in the last 4 days If you have taken any medicines such as Pepto Bismol in the last 4 days (this type of medicine can interfere with the x-ray)  You wear a hospital gown during the x-ray procedure. You must remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort. The x-rays are taken as you lie on your back, side, and while standing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test to: Diagnose a  pain in the abdomen  or unexplained  nausea Identify suspected problems in the urinary system, such as a  kidney stone Identify blockage in the intestine Locate an object that has been swallowed Help diagnose diseases, such as tumors or other conditions  Normal Results 
 
 The x-ray will show normal structures for a person your age. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal findings include: Abdominal masses Buildup of fluid in the abdomen Certain types of  gallstones Foreign object in the intestines Hole in the stomach or intestines Injury to the abdominal tissue Intestinal blockage Kidney stones Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared to the benefits. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. Women should tell their provider if they are, or may be, pregnant. Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal film; X-ray - abdomen; Flat plate; KUB x-ray Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Digestive system 
 References 
 
 Morrison ID, McLaughlin P, Maher MM. Current status of imaging of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging.  6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill-Livingstone; 2015:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Abdominal pain 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Addison disease 
 Adenomyosis 
 Annular pancreas 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Appendicitis 
 Ascariasis 
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 Biliary atresia 
 Blind loop syndrome 
 Cholangitis 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Cirrhosis 
 Echinococcosis 
 Encopresis 
 Gallstones 
 Hirschsprung disease 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Intestinal pseudo-obstruction 
 Intussusception - children 
 Kidney stones 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Necrotizing enterocolitis 
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 Peritonitis - spontaneous bacterial 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 Toxic megacolon 
 Wilms tumor 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia