
 ABO incompatibility 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A, B, AB, and O are the 4 major blood types. The types are based on small substances (molecules) on the surface of the blood cells. When people who have one blood type receive blood from someone with a different blood type, it may cause their immune system to react. This is called ABO incompatibility. Due to modern testing techniques, this problem is very rare. Causes 
 
 The different blood types are: Type A Type B Type AB Type O  People who have one blood type may form proteins ( antibodies ) that cause their immune system to react against one or more of the other blood types.  Being exposed to another type of blood can cause a reaction. This is important when someone needs to receive blood (transfusion) or have an organ transplant. The blood types must be compatible to avoid an ABO incompatibility reaction. For example: People with type A blood will react against type B or type AB blood. People with type B blood will react against type A or type AB blood. People with type O blood will react against type A, type B, or type AB blood. People with type AB blood will not react against type A, type B, type AB, or type O blood.  Type O blood does not cause an immune response when it is given to people with type A, type B, or type AB blood. This is why type O blood cells can be given to people of any blood type. People with type O blood are called universal donors. But people with type O can only receive type O blood. Both blood and plasma transfusions must be matched to avoid an immune reaction. Before anyone receives blood, both the blood and the person receiving it are tested carefully to avoid a reaction. Usually, a reaction occurs because of a clerical error causing someone to receive incompatible blood. Symptoms 
 
 The following are symptoms of ABO incompatible transfusion reactions: Back pain Blood in urine Chills Feeling of "impending doom" Fever Yellow skin and whites of the eyes ( jaundice ) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Blood tests will usually show: 
   The  bilirubin level  is high 
   The  complete blood count  (CBC) shows damage to red blood cells or  anemia The recipient's and donor's blood are not compatible  Urine tests show the presence of hemoglobin due to breakdown of red blood cells.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include: Drugs used to treat allergic reactions (antihistamines) Drugs used to treat swelling and allergies (steroids) Fluids given through a vein (intravenously) Medicines to raise blood pressure if it drops too low Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 ABO incompatibility can be a very serious problem that can result in death. With the right treatment, a full recovery is expected. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Kidney failure Low blood pressure needing intensive care Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have recently had a blood transfusion or transplant and you have symptoms of ABO incompatibility. Prevention 
 
 Careful testing of donor and recipient blood types before transfusion or transplant can prevent this problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic; Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction; AHTR; Blood incompatibility - ABO Images 
 
 
 Jaundiced infant 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Bellone M, Hillyer CD. Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions. In: Shaz BH, Hillyer CD, Roshal M, Abrams CS, eds.  Transfusion Medicine and Hemostasis: Clinical and Laboratory Aspects . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 61. Miller RD. Patient blood management. In: Miller RD, ed.  Miller's Anesthesia . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 61. 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Transfusion and Donation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia