
 Acetone poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acetone is a chemical used in many household products. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing acetone-based products. Poisoning may also occur from breathing in fumes or absorbing it through the skin. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Acetone; Dimethyl formaldehyde; Dimethyl ketone Where Found 
 
 Acetone can be found in: Nail polish remover Some cleaning solutions Some glues, including rubber cement Some lacquers Other products may also contain acetone. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of acetone poisoning or exposure in different parts of the body.   
 HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS (CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM)
  Low blood pressure  
 STOMACH AND INTESTINES (GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM)
  Nausea and vomiting Pain in belly area Person may have a fruity odor Sweet taste in mouth  
 NERVOUS SYSTEM
  Feeling of drunkenness Coma  (unconscious, unresponsive) Drowsiness Stupor  (confusion, decreased level of consciousness) Lack of coordination   
 BREATHING (RESPIRATORY)
SYSTEM  Difficulty breathing Slowed breathing rate Shortness of breath  
 URINARY SYSTEM
  Increased need to urinate Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make a person throw up unless the poison control center or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container that contains the acetone with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a breathing tube through the mouth into the lungs Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (IV, fluids given through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the nose into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Accidentally drinking small amounts of acetone/nail polish remover is unlikely to harm you as an adult. However, even small amounts can be dangerous to your child, so it is important to keep this and all household chemicals in a safe place. If the person survives past 48 hours, the chances for recovery are good. Alternative Names 
 
 Dimethyl formaldehyde poisoning; Dimethyl ketone poisoning; Nail polish remover poisoning References 
 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Toxicological profile for acetone. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. Available at:  www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=5&tid=1 . Accessed August 17, 2015. White SA. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Household Products 
 Browse the Encyclopedia