
 Actinic keratosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Actinic keratosis is a small, rough, raised area on your skin. Often this area has been exposed to the sun for a long period of time. Some actinic keratoses may develop into a type of skin cancer. Causes 
 
 Actinic keratosis is caused by exposure to sunlight.  You are more likely to develop it if you: Have fair skin, blue or green eyes, or blond or red hair Had a kidney or other organ transplant Take medicines that suppress the immune system Spend a lot of time each day in the sun (for example, if you work outdoors) Had many severe sunburns early in life Are older  Symptoms 
 
 Actinic keratosis is usually found on the face, scalp, back of the hands, chest, or places that are often in the sun.  The skin changes begin as flat and scaly areas. They often have a white or yellow crusty scale on top. The growths may be gray, pink, red, or the same color as your skin. Later they may become hard and wart-like or gritty and rough. The affected areas may be easier to feel than see. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at your skin to diagnose this condition. A  skin biopsy  may be done to see if it is cancer.  Treatment 
 
 Some actinic keratoses become  squamous cell skin cancer . Have your provider look at all skin growths as soon as you find them. Your provider will tell you how to treat them. Growths may be removed by: Burning (electrical cautery) Scraping away the lesion and using electricity to kill any remaining cells (called curettage and electrodesiccation) Cutting the tumor out and using stitches to place the skin back together (called excision) Freezing (cryotherapy, which freezes and kills the cells) If you have many of these skin growths, your doctor may recommend: A laser treatment called  photodynamic therapy Chemical peels Skin creams, such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and imiquimod Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A small number of these skin growths turn into a type of skin cancer called squamous cell carcinoma.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you see or feel a rough or scaly spot on your skin, or if you notice any other skin changes. Prevention 
 
 The best way to lower your risk for actinic keratosis and skin cancer is to  learn how to protect your skin from sun and ultraviolet (UV) light . Things you can do to lower your exposure to sunlight include: Wear clothing such as hats, long-sleeved shirts, long skirts, or pants. Try to avoid being in the sun during midday, when ultraviolet light is most intense. Use high-quality sunscreens, preferably with a sun protection factor (SPF) rating of at least 15. Pick a broad spectrum sunscreen that blocks both UVA and UVB light. Apply sunscreen before going out into the sun, and reapply often -- at least every 2 hours while in the sun. Use sunscreen year-round, including in the winter. Avoid sun lamps, tanning beds, and tanning salons. Other things to know about  sun exposure : Sun exposure is stronger in or near surfaces that reflect light, such as water, sand, concrete, and areas painted white. Sunlight is more intense at the beginning of the summer. Skin burns faster at higher altitudes. Alternative Names 
 
 Solar keratosis; Sun-induced skin changes - keratosis; Keratosis - actinic (solar); Skin lesion - actinic keratosis  Images 
 
 
 Actinic keratosis on the arm 
 Actinic keratosis - close-up 
 Actinic keratosis on the forearms 
 Actinic keratosis on the scalp 
 Actinic keratosis - ear 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Premalignant and malignant nonmelanoma skin tumors. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 21. Ibrahim SF, Brown MD. Actinic keratoses. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 5. Read More 
 
 Squamous cell skin cancer 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Cancer 
 Skin Conditions 
 Sun Exposure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia