
 Acute adrenal crisis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute adrenal crisis is a life-threatening condition that occurs when there is not enough cortisol. This is a hormone produced by the  adrenal glands . Causes 
 
 The  adrenal glands  are located just above the kidneys. The adrenal gland consists of 2 parts. The outer portion, called the cortex, produces cortisol. This is an important hormone for controlling blood pressure. The inner portion, called the medulla, produces the hormone adrenaline (also called epinephrine). Both cortisol and adrenaline are released in response to  stress . Cortisol production is regulated by the pituitary gland. This is a small gland behind the nose and under the brain. The pituitary gland releases adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This is a hormone that causes the adrenal glands to release cortisol.  Adrenaline production is regulated by nerves coming from the brain and spinal cord and by circulating hormones. Adrenal crisis occurs when: The adrenal gland is damaged due to, for example,  Addison disease  or other adrenal gland disease, and surgery The pituitary gland is injured and cannot release ACTH Adrenal insufficiency is not properly treated  Risk factors for adrenal crisis include: Dehydration Infection and other physical stress Injury to the adrenal or pituitary gland Stopping treatment too suddenly with glucocorticoid medicines such as prednisone or hydrocortisone Surgery Trauma  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms and signs of adrenal crisis can include any of the following: Abdominal pain  or  flank pain Confusion , loss of consciousness, or  coma Dehydration Dizziness or light-headedness Fatigue , severe weakness Headache High  fever Loss of appetite Low blood pressure Nausea , vomiting
    Rapid heart rate Rapid respiratory rate Slow, sluggish movement Unusual and excessive sweating on face or palms Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be ordered to help diagnose acute adrenal crisis include: ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation test Cortisol level Blood sugar Serum potassium Serum sodium Serum pH  Treatment 
 
 In adrenal crisis, a person needs an immediate injection of hydrocortisone through a vein ( intravenous ) or muscle (intramuscular). You may receive intravenous fluids if you have low blood pressure. You will need to go to the hospital for treatment and monitoring. If infection or another medical problem caused the crisis, you may need additional treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Shock  may occur if treatment is not provided early, and it can be life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you develop symptoms of acute adrenal crisis. Call your health care provider if you have Addison disease and are unable to take your glucocorticoid medicine for any reason. If you have Addison disease, you will usually be told to temporarily increase the dosage of your glucocorticoid medicine if you are very ill, or before having surgery. Prevention 
 
 If you have Addison disease, learn to recognize the signs of potential stress that may cause an acute adrenal crisis. If you have been instructed by your doctor, be prepared to give yourself an emergency shot of glucocorticoid or to increase your dosage of oral glucocorticoid medicine in times of stress. Parents should learn to do this for their children who have adrenal insufficiency. Always carry medical ID (card, bracelet, or necklace) that says you have adrenal insufficiency. The ID should also say the type of medicine and dosage you need in case of an emergency. Never miss taking your medicines. Alternative Names 
 
 Adrenal crisis; Addisonian crisis; Acute adrenal insufficiency Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Adrenal gland hormone secretion 
 References 
 
 Nelson BK. Adrenal crisis. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 168. Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Adrenal glands 
 Immune response 
 Seizures 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Addison Disease 
 Adrenal Gland Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia