
 Acute cholecystitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute cholecystitis is sudden swelling and irritation of the gallbladder. It causes severe belly pain.  Causes 
 
 The gallbladder is an organ that sits below the liver. It stores bile, which your body uses to digest fats in the small intestine.  Acute cholecystitis occurs when  bile  becomes trapped in the gallbladder. This often happens because a  gallstone  blocks the cystic duct, the tube through which bile travels into and out of the gallbladder. When a stone blocks this duct, bile builds up, causing irritation and pressure in the gallbladder. This can lead to swelling and infection. Other causes include: Serious illnesses, such as HIV or diabetes Tumors of the gallbladder (rare)  Some people are more at risk for gallstones. Risk factors include: Being female Pregnancy Hormone therapy Older age Being Native American or Hispanic Obesity Losing or gaining weight rapidly Diabetes  Sometimes the bile duct becomes blocked temporarily. When this occurs repeatedly, it can lead to  chronic cholecystitis . This is swelling and irritation that continues over time. Eventually, the gallbladder becomes thick and hard. It does not store and release bile as well as it did.  Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is pain in the upper right side or upper middle of your belly that usually lasts at least 30 minutes. You may feel: Sharp, cramping, or dull pain Steady pain Pain that spreads to your back or below your right shoulder blade  Other symptoms that may occur include: Clay-colored stools Fever Nausea and vomiting Yellowing of skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. During the physical exam, you will likely have pain when the provider touches your belly. Your provider may order the following blood tests: Amylase  and lipase Bilirubin Complete blood count ( CBC ) Liver function tests Imaging tests can show gallstones or inflammation. You may have one of these tests: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan Abdominal x-ray Oral cholecystogram Gallbladder radionuclide scan Treatment 
 
 If you have severe belly pain, seek medical attention right away. In the emergency room, you'll be given fluids through a vein. You also may be given antibiotics to fight infection. Cholecystitis may clear up on its own. However, if you have gallstones, you will probably need  surgery to remove your gallbladder .  Nonsurgical treatment includes: Antibiotics you take at home to fight infection Low-fat diet (if you are able to eat) Pain medicines  You may need emergency surgery if you have complications such as: Gangrene  (tissue death) Perforation (a hole that forms in the wall of the gallbladder) Pancreatitis  (inflamed pancreas) Persistent bile duct blockage Inflammation of the common bile duct  If you are very ill, a tube may be placed through your belly into your gallbladder to drain it. Once you feel better, you may have  surgery . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people who have surgery to remove their gallbladder recover completely. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, cholecystitis may lead to any of the following health problems: Empyema  (pus in the gallbladder) Gangrene Injury to the bile ducts draining the liver (may occur after gallbladder surgery) Pancreatitis Perforation Peritonitis  (inflammation of the lining of the abdomen)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Severe belly pain does not go away Symptoms of cholecystitis return  Prevention 
 
 Removing the gallbladder and gallstones will prevent further attacks. Alternative Names 
 
 Cholecystitis - acute Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Cholecystitis, CT scan 
 Cholecystitis, cholangiogram 
 Cholecystolithiasis 
 Gallstones, cholangiogram 
 Digestive system organs 
 Gallbladder removal - Series 
 Cholecystogram 
 References 
 
 Glasgow RE, Mulvihill SJ. Treatment of gallstone disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease:Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 66. Jackson P, Evans S. Biliary system. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap. 55. Wang DQH, Afdhal NH. Gallstone disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease:Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 65. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Bile 
 Empyema 
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic 
 Gallstones 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic - discharge 
 Gallbladder removal - open - discharge 
 Gallstones - discharge 
 Review Date 8/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia