
 Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute myeloid leukemia is a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft tissue inside bones that helps form blood cells. Acute means the cancer develops quickly.  Both adults and children can get acute myeloid leukemia ( AML ). This article is about AML in children. Causes 
 
 In children, AML is very rare. AML involves cells in the bone marrow that usually become white blood cells. These leukemia cells build up in the bone marrow and blood, leaving no space for healthy red and white blood cells and  platelets  to form. Because there are not enough healthy cells to do their jobs, children with AML are more likely to have: Anemia Increased risk for bleeding and bruising Infections  Most of the time, what causes AML is unknown. In children, some things can increase the risk of developing AML: Exposure to alcohol or tobacco smoke before birth A history of certain diseases, such as  aplastic anemia Certain genetic disorders, such as  Down syndrome Past treatment with some drugs used to treat cancer Past treatment with radiation therapy  Having one or more risk factor does not mean your child will develop cancer. Most children who develop AML have no known risk factors. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of AML include: Bone or joint pain Frequent infections Easy bleeding or bruising Feeling weak or tired Fever with or without an infection Night sweats Painless lumps in the neck, armpits, stomach, groin, or other parts of the body that may be blue or purple Pinpoint spots under the skin caused by bleeding Shortness of breath Loss of appetite and eating less food Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform the following exams and tests: Physical exam and health history Complete blood count (CBC)  and other blood tests Blood chemistry study Chest x-ray Biopsies of the  bone marrow , tumor, or  lymph node A test to look for changes in the chromosomes in blood or bone marrow Other tests may be done to determine the specific type of AML. Treatment 
 
 Treatment for children with AML may include: 
   Anticancer drugs ( chemotherapy ) Radiation therapy Certain types of targeted therapy Blood transfusions may be given to help treat anemia The provider may suggest a  bone marrow transplant . A transplant is usually not done until the AML is in remission from initial chemotherapy. Remission means no signs of cancer can be found in an exam or with testing. A transplant can improve the chances of a cure and long-term survival for some children. Your child's treatment team will explain the different options to you. You may want to take notes. Be sure to ask questions if you don't understand something. Support Groups 
 
 Having a child with cancer can make you feel very alone. In a cancer support group, you can find people who are going through the same things you are. They can help you cope with your feelings. They can also help you find help or solutions for problems. Ask your health care team or staff at the cancer center to help you find a support group. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Cancer can come back at any time. But with AML, it is very unlikely to come back after being gone for 5 years. Possible Complications 
 
 The leukemia cells can spread from the blood to other parts of the body, such as: Brain Spinal fluid Skin Gums The cancer cells can also form a solid tumor in the body. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider right away if your child develops any symptoms of AML. Also, see your provider if your child has AML and a fever or other signs of infection that will not go away. Prevention 
 
 Many childhood cancers can't be prevented. Most children who develop leukemia have no risk factors. Alternative Names 
 
 Acute myelogenous leukemia - children; AML - children; Acute granulocytic leukemia - children; Acute myeloblastic leukemia - children; Acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) - children References 
 
 American Cancer Society. Childhood leukemia. Updated February 3, 2016.  www.cancer.org/cancer/leukemiainchildren/detailedguide/childhood-leukemia-what-is-childhood-leukemia . Accessed August 3, 2016. National Cancer Institute. PDQ Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia/Other Myeloid Malignancies Treatment. Updated July 28, 2016. National Cancer Institute.  www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/patient/child-aml-treatment-pdq . Accessed August 3, 2016. Wei MC, Dahl GV, Weinstein HJ. Acute myeloid leukemia in children. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 61. 
 Review Date 8/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Adam S. Levy, MD, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Myeloid Leukemia 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia