
 
 
 
 
 Acute pancreatitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
    			Acute pancreatitis is sudden swelling and inflammation of the pancreas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The pancreas is an organ located behind the stomach. It produces the hormones insulin and glucagon. It also produces chemicals called enzymes needed to digest food.  Most of the time, the enzymes are only active after they reach the small intestine. 
 
 If these enzymes become active inside the pancreas, they can digest the tissue of the pancreas. This causes swelling, bleeding, and damage to the organ and its blood vessels. 
 This problem is called acute pancreatitis. 
 
 Acute pancreatitis affects men more often than women. Certain diseases, surgeries, and habits make you more likely to develop this condition. 
 
 Alcohol use is responsible for up to 70% of cases in the United States. About 5 to 8 drinks per day for 5 or more years can damage the pancreas. 
 Gallstones are the next most common cause. When the gallstones travel out of the gallbladder into the bile ducts, they block the opening that drains bile and enzymes. The bile and enzymes "back up" into the pancreas and cause swelling. 
 Genetics may be a factor in some cases. Sometimes, the cause is not known. 
 
 Other conditions that have been linked to pancreatitis are: 
 
 Autoimmune problems (when the immune system attacks the body) 
 Damage to the ducts or pancreas during surgery 
 High blood levels of a fat called  triglycerides  -- most often above 1,000 mg/dL 
 Injury to the pancreas from an accident 
 
 Other causes include: 
 
 After certain procedures used to diagnose gallbladder and pancreas problems (ERCP) or ultrasound guided biopsy 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Overactive parathyroid gland 
 Reye syndrome 
 Use of certain medicines (especially estrogens, corticosteroids, sulfonamides, thiazides, and azathioprine) 
 Certain infections that involve the pancreas 
 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The main symptom of pancreatitis is pain felt in the upper left side or middle of the abdomen. The  pain : 
 
 May be worse within minutes after eating or drinking at first, more commonly if foods have a high fat content 
 Becomes constant and more severe, lasting for several days 
 May be worse when lying flat on the back 
 May spread (radiate) to the back or below the left shoulder blade 
 
 People with acute pancreatitis often look ill and have a fever, nausea, vomiting, and sweating. Other symptoms that may occur with this disease include: 
 
 Clay-colored stools 
 Bloating and fullness 
 Hiccups 
 Indigestion 
 Mild yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) 
 Swollen abdomen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam, which may show: 
 
 Abdominal tenderness or lump (mass) 
 Fever Low blood pressure 
 Rapid heart rate Rapid breathing (respiratory) rate 
 
 Lab tests that show the release of pancreatic enzymes will be done. These include: 
 
 Increased blood amylase level 
 Increased  serum blood lipase level 
 Increased  urine amylase level 
 
 Other blood tests that can help diagnose pancreatitis or its complications include: 
 
 Complete blood count  (CBC) 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 
 Imaging tests that can show swelling of the pancreas include: 
 
 CT scan of the abdomen 
 MRI of the abdomen 
 Ultrasound of the abdomen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment often requires a stay in the hospital. It may involve: 
 
 Pain medicines 
 Fluids given through a vein (IV) 
 Stopping food or fluid by mouth to limit the activity of the pancreas 
 
 A tube may be inserted through the nose or mouth to remove the contents of the stomach. This may be done if vomiting and severe pain do not improve. The tube will stay in for 1 to 2 days to 1 to 2 weeks. Treating the condition that caused the problem can prevent repeated attacks. In some cases, therapy is needed to: 
 
 Drain  fluid that has collected in or around the pancreas 
 Remove  gallstones 
 Relieve blockages of the pancreatic duct 
 
 In the most severe cases, surgery is needed to remove damaged, dead or infected pancreatic tissue. Avoid smoking, alcoholic drinks, and fatty foods after the attack has improved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most cases go away in a week. However, some cases develop into a life-threatening illness. The death rate is high with: 
 
 Bleeding in the pancreas  has occurred 
 Liver, heart, or kidney problems are also present 
 An abscess forms the pancreas 
 There is death or necrosis of larger amounts of tissue in the pancreas 
 
 Sometimes the swelling and infection do not fully heal. Repeat episodes of pancreatitis may also occur. Either of these can lead to  long-term damage of the pancreas . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Possible Complications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pancreatitis can return. The chances of it returning depend on the cause, and how well it can be treated. Complications of acute pancreatitis may include: 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Long-term lung damage  (ARDS) 
 Buildup of fluid in the abdomen ( ascites ) 
 Cysts  or  abscesses  in the pancreas 
 Heart failure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your provider if: 
 
 You have intense, constant abdominal pain. 
 You develop other symptoms of acute pancreatitis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prevention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 You may lower your risk of new or repeat episodes of pancreatitis by taking steps to prevent the medical conditions that can lead to the disease: 
 
 DO NOT drink too much alcohol. 
 Make sure  children receive vaccines  to protect them against mumps and other childhood illnesses. 
 Treat medical problems that lead to high blood levels of triglycerides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gallstone pancreatitis; Pancreas - inflammation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Tenner S, Baillie J, DeWitt J, et al. American College of Gastroenterology guideline: management of acute pancreatitis.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2013;108:1400-1415. PMID: 23896955  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23896955 . Tenner S, Steinbert WM. Acute pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 58. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pancreatitis, acute - CT scan 
 Pancreatitis  - series 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pancreatitis - discharge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gallstones 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Pancreatic Disease 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Pancreatitis 
 Read more       
   
 
