
 Adenoid removal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adenoid removal is surgery to take out the adenoid glands. The adenoid glands sit behind your nose above the roof of your mouth. Air passes over these glands when you take a breath. The adenoids are often taken out at the same time as the tonsils ( tonsillectomy ). Adenoid removal is also called adenoidectomy. The procedure is most often done in children. Description 
 
 Your child will be given general anesthesia before surgery. This means your child will be asleep and unable to feel pain. During surgery: The surgeon places a small tool into your child's mouth to keep it open. The surgeon removes the adenoid glands using a spoon-shaped tool (curette). Or another tool that helps cut away soft tissue is used. Some surgeons use electricity to heat the tissue, remove it, and stop bleeding. This is called electrocautery. Another method uses radiofrequency (RF) energy to do the same thing. This is called coblation. A cutting tool called a debrider can also be used to remove the adenoid tissue. Absorbent material called packing material may also be used to control bleeding.  Your child will stay in the recovery room after surgery. You will be allowed to take your child home when your child is awake and can breathe easily, cough, and swallow. In most cases, this will be a few hours after surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 A health care provider may recommend this procedure if:  Enlarged adenoids  are blocking your child's airway. Symptoms in your child can include heavy snoring, problems breathing through the nose, and episodes of not breathing during sleep. Your child has chronic ear infections that occur often, continue despite use of antibiotics, cause hearing loss, or cause the child to miss a lot of school days.  Adenoidectomy may also be recommended if your child has tonsillitis that keeps coming back. The adenoids normally shrink as children grow older. Adults rarely need to have them removed. Risks 
 
 Risks of any anesthesia are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Risks of any surgery are: Bleeding Infection  Before the Procedure 
 
 Your provider will tell you how to prepare your child for this procedure.  A week before the surgery, do not give your child any medicine that thins the blood unless your doctor says to do so. Such medicines include aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin). The night before the surgery, your child should have nothing to eat or drink after midnight. This includes water. You will be told what medicines your child should take on the day of surgery. Have your child take the medicine with a sip of water. After the Procedure 
 
 Your child will go home on the same day as surgery. Complete recovery takes about 1 to 2 weeks. Follow instructions on how to  care for your child at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After this procedure, most children: Breathe better through the nose Have fewer and milder sore throats Have fewer ear infections  In rare cases, adenoid tissue may grow back. This does not cause problems most of the time. Alternative Names 
 
 Adenoidectomy; Removal of adenoid glands Images 
 
 
 Adenoid removal  - series 
 References 
 
 Wetmore RF. Tonsils and adenoids. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 375. Wooley AL, Wiatrak BJ. Pharyngitis and adenotonsilar disease. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 196. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Enlarged adenoids 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Stuffy or runny nose - adult 
 Tonsillectomy 
 Tonsillitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Tonsil and adenoid removal - discharge 
 Tonsil removal - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, BS, Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adenoids 
 Browse the Encyclopedia