
 Adrenoleukodystrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adrenoleukodystrophy describes several closely related disorders that disrupt the breakdown of certain fats. These disorders are passed down (inherited) in families. Causes 
 
 Adrenoleukodystrophy is usually passed down from parent to child as an  X-linked genetic trait . It affects mostly males, although some women who are carriers can have milder forms of the disease. It affects about 1 in 20,000 people from all races. The condition results in the buildup of very-long-chain fatty acids in the nervous system, adrenal gland, and testes. This disrupts normal activity in these parts of the body.  There are 3 major categories of disease: Childhood cerebral form -- appears in mid-childhood (at ages 4 to 8) Adrenomyelopathy -- occurs in men in their 20s or later in life Impaired adrenal gland function (called Addison disease or Addison-like phenotype) -- adrenal gland does not produce enough steroid hormones Symptoms 
 
 Childhood cerebral type symptoms include: Changes in muscle tone, especially muscle spasms and uncontrolled movements Crossed eyes Handwriting that gets worse Difficulty at school Difficulty understanding what people are saying Hearing loss Hyperactivity Worsening nervous system damage, including coma, decreased fine motor control, and paralysis 

 
  Seizures Swallowing difficulties Visual impairment or blindness Adrenomyelopathy symptoms include: Difficulty controlling urination Possible worsening muscle weakness or leg stiffness Problems with thinking speed and visual memory Adrenal gland failure (Addison type) symptoms include: Coma Decreased appetite Increased skin color Loss of weight and muscle mass (wasting) Muscle weakness Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests for this condition include: Blood levels of very long chain fatty acids and hormones that are produced by the adrenal gland Chromosome study to look for changes (mutations) in the  ABCD1  gene MRI of the head  Treatment 
 
 Adrenal dysfunction may be treated with steroids (such as cortisol) if the adrenal gland is not producing enough hormones. A specific treatment for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is not available. A bone marrow transplant can cure a people of the condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The childhood form of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is a progressive disease. It leads to a long-term coma (vegetative state) about 2 years after nervous system symptoms develop. The child can live in this condition for as long as 10 years until death occurs. The other forms of this disease are milder. Possible Complications 
 
  These complications can occur: Adrenal crisis Vegetative state When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your child develops symptoms of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy Your child has X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and is getting worse Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for couples with a family history of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Mothers of affected sons have an 85% chance of being a carrier for this condition. Prenatal diagnosis of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is also available. It is done by testing cells from  chorionic villus sampling  or  amniocentesis . These tests look for either a known genetic change in the family or for very long chain fatty acid levels. Alternative Names 
 
 X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy; Adrenomyeloneuropathy; Childhood cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy; ALD; Schilder-Addison Complex Images 
 
 
 Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy 
 References 
 
 

Raymond GV. Disorders of very long chain fatty acids. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 86. Steinberg SJ, Moser AB, Raymond GV. X-Linked adrenoleukodystrophy. In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et al, eds.  GeneReviews.  University of Washington, Seattle, WA.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1315/ . Updated April 9, 2015. Accessed October 24, 2015.  Read More 
 
 Acute adrenal crisis 
 Adrenal glands 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Contracture deformity 
 Genetics 
 Hyperactivity 
 Metabolism 
 Seizures 
 Strabismus 
 Testes 
 White matter of the brain 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Leukodystrophies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia