
 Adrenocortical carcinoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a cancer of the  adrenal glands . The adrenal glands are two triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney. Causes 
 
 ACC is most common in children younger than 5 years old and adults in their 40s and 50s. The condition may be linked to a cancer syndrome that is passed down through families (inherited). Both men and women can develop this tumor. ACC can produce the hormones cortisol, aldosterone, estrogen, or testosterone, as well as other hormones. In women the tumor often releases these hormones, which can lead to male characteristics. ACC is very rare. The cause is unknown. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of increased cortisol or other adrenal gland hormones may include: Fatty, rounded hump high on the back just below the neck ( buffalo hump ) Flushed, rounded face with pudgy cheeks ( moon face ) Obesity Stunted growth ( short stature ) Virilization  -- the appearance of male characteristics, including increased body hair (especially on the face), pubic hair,  acne , deepening of the voice, and enlarged clitoris (girls)  Symptoms of increased aldosterone are the same as symptoms of low potassium, and include: Muscle cramps Weakness Pain in the abdomen  Exams and Tests 
 
  The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Blood tests will be done to check hormone levels: ACTH  level will be low. Aldosterone  level will be high. Cortisol  level will be high. Potassium  level will be low. Male or female hormones may be abnormally high. Imaging tests of the abdomen may include: Ultrasound CT scan MRI PET scan Treatment 
 
 Primary treatment is surgery to remove the tumor. ACC may not improve with  chemotherapy . Medicines may be given to reduce production of cortisol, which causes many of the symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on how early the diagnosis is made and whether the tumor has spread (metastasized). Tumors that have spread usually lead to death within 1 to 3 years. Possible Complications 
 
 The tumor can spread to the liver, bone, lung, or other areas. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child has symptoms of ACC,  Cushing syndrome , or failure to grow. Alternative Names 
 
 Tumor - adrenal; ACC - adrenal Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Adrenal metastases, CT scan 
 Adrenal Tumor - CT 
 References 
 
 Allolio B, Fassnacht M. Adrenocortical carcinoma. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 107. National Cancer Institute. PDQ: adrenocortical carcinoma treatment - health professional version. Updated June 02, 2015. Cancer.gov.  www.cancer.gov/types/adrenocortical/hp/adrenocortical-treatment-pdq#section/all . Accessed October 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Adrenal glands 
 Metastasis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adrenal Gland Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia