
 Adult Still's disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adult Still's disease is a rare illness that causes high fevers, rash, and joint pain. It may lead to long-term (chronic) arthritis. Still's disease is a severe version of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), which occurs in children. Adults can have the same condition although it is much less common. It is also called adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD). Causes 
 
 Fewer than 1 out of 100,000 people develop adult-onset Still's disease each year. It affects women more often than men. The cause of adult Still's disease is unknown. No risk factors for the disease have been identified. Symptoms 
 
 Almost all people with the disease will have fever, joint pain, sore throat, and a rash. Joint pain, warmth, and swelling are common. Most often, several joints are involved at the same time. Often, people with the condition have morning stiffness of joints that lasts for several hours. The fever comes on quickly once per day, most commonly in the afternoon or evening. The skin rash is often salmon-pink colored and comes and goes with the fever.  Additional symptoms include: Abdominal pain and swelling Pain when taking a deep breath (pleurisy) Sore throat Swollen lymph nodes (glands) Weight loss  The spleen or liver may become swollen. Lung and heart inflammation may also occur. Exams and Tests 
 
 Adult-onset Still's disease can only be diagnosed after many other diseases (such as infections and cancer) are ruled out. You may need many medical tests before a final diagnosis is made. A physical exam may show a fever, rash, and arthritis. The health care provider will use a stethoscope to listen for changes in the sound of your heart or lungs. The following blood tests can be helpful in diagnosing adult Still's disease: Complete blood count  (CBC), may show a high number of white blood cells and reduced number of red blood cells. C-reactive protein  (CRP), a measure of inflammation, will be higher than normal. ESR  (sedimentation rate), a measure of inflammation, will be higher than normal. Ferritin  level will be very high. Fibrinogen level will be high. Liver function tests  will show high levels of  AST  and  ALT . Rheumatoid factor  and  ANA  test will be negative.  Other tests may be needed to check for inflammation of the joints, chest, liver, and spleen: Abdominal ultrasound CT scan of the abdomen X-rays of the joints, chest, or stomach area (abdomen)  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment for adult Still's disease is to control the symptoms of  arthritis . Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, are most often used first. Prednisone may be used for more severe cases. If the disease persists for a long time (becomes chronic), medicines that suppress the immune system might be needed. Such medicines include: Methotrexate Anakinra (interleukin-1 receptor agonist) Tocilizumab (interleukin 6 inhibitor) Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists such as Enbrel (etanercept)  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Studies show that in about 1 in 5 people all symptoms go away in a year and never come back. In many people, symptoms go away but then come back several times over the next few years. Symptoms continue for a long time (chronic) in about half of patients with adult Still's disease. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Arthritis in several joints Liver disease Pericarditis Pleural effusion Spleen enlargement  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of adult-onset Still's disease. If you have already been diagnosed with the condition, you should call your provider if you have a  cough  or  difficulty breathing . Alternative Names 
 
 Still's disease - adult; AOSD References 
 
 Clarke JT. Other Rheumatologic Diseases. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 45. Gerfaud-Valentin M, Maucort-Boulch D, Hot A, et al. Adult-onset still disease: manifestations, treatment, outcome, and prognostic factors in 57 patients.  Medicine  (Baltimore). 2014;93:91. PMID: 24646465  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24646465 .  Lee LA, Werth VP. The Skin and Rheumatic Diseases. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 43.  Read More 
 
 Pericarditis 
 Pleural effusion 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia