
 Agitation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Agitation is an unpleasant state of extreme arousal. An agitated person may feel stirred up, excited, tense, confused, or irritable. Considerations 
 
 Agitation can come on suddenly or over time. It can last for a few minutes, for weeks, or even months. Pain, stress, and  fever  can all increase agitation. Agitation by itself may not be a sign of a health problem. But if other symptoms occur, it can be a sign of disease. Agitation with a change in alertness (altered consciousness) can be a sign of  delirium . Delirium has a medical cause and should be checked by a health care provider right away. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of agitation. Some of them are: Alcohol intoxication or  withdrawal Allergic reaction Caffeine intoxication Certain forms of heart, lung, liver, or kidney disease Intoxication or withdrawal from drugs of abuse (such as cocaine, marijuana, hallucinogens, PCP, or opiates) Hospitalization (older adults often have delirium while in the hospital) 
   Overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ) Infection (especially in elderly people) Nicotine withdrawal Poisoning (for example, carbon monoxide poisoning) Some medicines, including theophylline, amphetamines, and steroids Trauma Vitamin B6  deficiency  Agitation can occur with brain and mental health disorders, such as: Anxiety Dementia (such as  Alzheimer disease ) Depression Mania Schizophrenia Home Care 
 
 The most important way to deal with agitation is to find and treat the cause. Agitation may lead to an increased risk of  suicide  and other forms of violence. After treating the cause, the following measures can reduce agitation: 
   A calm environment
    
   Enough lighting during the day and darkness at night
    
   Medicines such as benzodiazepines, and in some cases, antipsychotics
    
   Plenty of sleep
    DO NOT physically hold back an agitated person, if possible. This usually makes the problem worse. Use restraints only if the person is at risk of harming themselves or others, and there is no other way to control the behavior. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider for agitation that: Lasts a long time Is very severe Occurs with thoughts or actions of hurting yourself or others Occurs with other, unexplained symptoms What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take a medical history and do a physical examination. To better understand your agitation, your provider may ask you specific things about your agitation. Tests may include: Blood tests (such as a blood count, infection screening, thyroid tests, or vitamin levels) Head CT  or  head MRI  scan Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) Urine tests (for infection screening, drug screening) Vital signs  (temperature,  pulse , breathing rate, blood pressure)  Alternative Names 
 
 Restlessness Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013. Bope ET, Kellerman RD. Psychiatric disorders. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:section 15. Inouye SK. Delirium or acute mental status change in the older patient. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 28. Prager LM, Ivkovic A. Emergency psychiatry. In: Stern TA, Rosenbaum JF, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 88. Young JL, Rund DA. Mood disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 111. Read More 
 
 Confusion 
 Fever 
 Hyperactivity 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 2/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Timothy Rogge, MD, Medical Director, Family Medical Psychiatry Center, Kirkland, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anxiety 
 Browse the Encyclopedia