
 Aicardi syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aicardi syndrome is a rare disorder. In this condition, the structure that connects the two sides of the brain (called the corpus callosum) is partly or completely missing. Nearly all known cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family (sporadic). Causes 
 
 The cause of Aicardi syndrome is unknown at this time. In some cases, experts believe it may be a result of a gene defect on the  X chromosome . The disorder affects only girls. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms most often start when the child is between ages 3 and 5 months. The condition causes jerking (infantile spasms), a type of childhood seizure. Aicardi syndrome may occur with other brain defects. Other symptoms may include: Coloboma  (cat's eye) Intellectual disability Smaller-than-normal eyes (microphthalmia)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Children are diagnosed with Aicardi syndrome if they meet the following criteria: Corpus callosum that is partly or completely missing Female sex Seizures  (typically beginning as infantile spasms) Sores on the retina (retinal lesions) or optic nerve  In rare cases, one of these features may be missing (especially lack of development of the corpus callosum). Tests to diagnose Aicardi syndrome include: CT scan of the head EEG Eye exam MRI Other procedures and tests may be done, depending on the person. Treatment 
 
 Treatment is done to help prevent symptoms. It involves managing seizures and any other health concerns. Treatment uses programs to help the family and child cope with delays in development. Support Groups 
 
 Aicardi Syndrome Foundation --  ouraicardilife.org National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) --  www.rarediseases.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on how severe the symptoms are and what other health conditions are present. Nearly all children with this syndrome have severe learning difficulties and remain completely dependent on others. However, a few have some language abilities and some can walk on their own or with support. Vision varies from normal to blind. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the severity of symptoms. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has symptoms of Aicardi syndrome. Seek emergency care if the infant is having spasms or a seizure. Alternative Names 
 
 Agenesis of corpus callosum with chorioretinal abnormality; Agenesis of corpus callosum with infantile spasms and ocular abnormalities; Callosal agenesis and ocular abnormalities; Chorioretinal anomalies with ACC Images 
 
 
 Corpus callosum of the brain 
 References 
 
 Beres S. Aicardi syndrome. American Academy of Ophthalmology Web site.  www.aao.org/pediatric-center-detail/neuro-ophthalmology-aicardi-syndrome . Accessed September 27, 2016. Kinsman SL, Johnston MV. Congenital anomalies of the central nervous system. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 591. US National Library of Medicine. Aicardi syndrome. Updated September 20, 2016.  ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/aicardi-syndrome . Accessed September 27, 2016. 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Malformations 
 Browse the Encyclopedia