
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alcohol use involves drinking beer, wine, or hard liquor. Information 
 
 Alcohol is one of the most widely used drug substances in the world. TEEN DRINKING Alcohol use is not only an adult problem. Most American high school seniors have had an alcoholic drink within the past month. This is in spite of the fact that the legal drinking age is 21 years old in the United States. About 1 in 5  teens are considered "problem drinkers."  This means that they: Get drunk Have accidents related to alcohol use Get into trouble with the law, family members, friends, school, or dates because of alcohol  THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL Alcoholic drinks have different amounts of alcohol in them. Beer is about 5% alcohol, although some beers can have more. Wine is usually 12% to 15% alcohol. Hard liquor is about 45% alcohol.  Alcohol gets into your bloodstream quickly. The amount and type of food in your stomach can change how quickly this occurs. For example, high-carbohydrate and high-fat foods can make your body absorb alcohol more slowly. Certain types of alcoholic drinks get into your bloodstream faster. Stronger drinks tend to be absorbed faster. Alcohol slows your breathing rate, heart rate, and how well your brain functions. These effects may appear within 10 minutes and peak at around 40 to 60 minutes. Alcohol stays in your bloodstream until it is broken down by the liver. The amount of alcohol in your blood is called your blood alcohol level. If you drink alcohol faster than the liver can break it down, this level rises. Your blood alcohol level is used to legally define whether or not you are drunk. The legal limit for blood alcohol usually falls between 0.08 and 0.10 in most states. Below is a list of blood alcohol levels and the likely symptoms: 0.05 -- reduced inhibitions 0.10 -- slurred speech 0.20 -- euphoria and motor impairment 0.30 -- confusion 0.40 -- stupor 0.50 -- coma 0.60 -- breathing stops and death  You can have symptoms of being drunk at blood alcohol levels below the legal definition of being drunk. Also, people who drink alcohol frequently may not have symptoms until a higher blood alcohol level is reached. HEALTH RISKS OF ALCOHOL Alcohol increases the risk of: Alcoholism Falls, drownings, and other accidents Head, neck, stomach, colon, breast, and other cancers Motor vehicle accidents Risky sex behaviors, unplanned or unwanted pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Suicide and homicide  Drinking during pregnancy can harm the developing baby. Severe birth defects or  fetal alcohol syndrome  are possible. RESPONSIBLE DRINKING If you drink alcohol, it is best to do so in moderation. Moderation means the drinking is not getting you intoxicated (or drunk) and you are drinking no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman and no more than 2 if you are a man. A drink is defined as 12 ounces (350 milliliters) of beer, 5 ounces (150 milliliters) of wine, or 1.5 ounces (45 milliliters) of liquor. Here are some ways to drink responsibly, provided you do not have a drinking problem, are of legal age to drink alcohol, and are not pregnant: Never drink alcohol and drive a car. If you are going to drink, have a designated driver, or plan an alternative way home, such as a taxi or bus. DO NOT drink on an empty stomach. Snack before and while drinking alcohol.  If you are taking medicines, including over-the-counter drugs, check with your health care provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make the effects of many medicines stronger. It can also interact with other medicines, making them ineffective or dangerous or make you sick. If alcohol use runs in your family, you may be at increased risk of developing this disease yourself. So, you may want to  avoid drinking alcohol altogether . CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IF: You are concerned about your personal alcohol use or that of a family member You are interested in more information regarding alcohol use or support groups You are unable to reduce or stop your alcohol consumption, in spite of attempts to stop drinking  Other  resources  include: Local Alcoholics Anonymous or Al-anon/Alateen groups Local hospitals Public or private mental health agencies School or work counselors Student or employee health centers  Alternative Names 
 
 Beer consumption; Wine consumption; Hard liquor consumption; Safe drinking; Teen drinking References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Moyer VA; Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: U.S. Preventative Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;159(3):210-218. PMID: 23698791  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23698791 . National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol and your health.  www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health . Accessed March 18, 2016. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol use disorder.  www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/overview-alcohol-consumption/alcohol-use-disorders . Accessed March 17, 2016. Sherin K, Seikel S, Hale S. Alcohol use disorders. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Alcohol withdrawal 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcohol 
 Browse the Encyclopedia