
 Alertness - decreased 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Decreased alertness is a state of reduced awareness. A coma is a state of decreased alertness from which a person cannot be awakened. A long-term coma is called a vegetative state. Causes 
 
 Many conditions can cause decreased alertness, including: Chronic kidney disease Extreme tiredness or lack of sleep High blood sugar  level or  low blood sugar  level High or low blood sodium concentration Infection that is severe or involves the brain Liver failure Thyroid conditions that cause  low thyroid hormone levels  or  very high thyroid hormone levels Brain disorders or injury, such as: Dementia  or  Alzheimer disease Head trauma Seizure Stroke Injury or accidents, such as: Diving accidents and near drowning Heat stroke Very low body temperature ( hypothermia )  Heart or breathing problems, such as: Abnormal heart rhythm Lack of oxygen from any cause Low blood pressure Severe  heart failure Severe lung diseases Very  high blood pressure Toxins and drugs, such as: Alcohol abuse (binge drinking or damage from long-term alcohol use) Exposure to heavy metals, hydrocarbons, or toxic gases Overuse of drugs such as opiates, narcotics, sedatives, and anti-anxiety or seizure medicines Side effect of almost any medicine, such as those used to treat seizures, depression, psychosis, and other illnesses  Home Care 
 
 Get medical help for any decrease in consciousness, even when it is due to  alcohol intoxication ,  fainting , or a  seizure disorder  that has already been diagnosed. See the article on  seizures  for tips on how to care for a person who is having a seizure. People with epilepsy or other seizure disorders should wear a medical ID bracelet or necklace describing their condition. They should avoid situations that have triggered a seizure in the past. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help if someone has decreased alertness that cannot be explained. Call your local emergency number (such as 911) if normal alertness does not return quickly. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Most often, a person with decreased consciousness will be evaluated in an emergency room. The health care provider will perform a  physical examination . The exam will include a detailed look at the heart, breathing, and nervous system. The health care team will ask questions about the person's medical history and symptoms, including: Time pattern When did the decreased alertness happen? How long did it last? Has it ever happened before? If so, how many times? Did the person behave the same way during past episodes?  Medical history Does the person have epilepsy or a seizure disorder? Does the person have  diabetes ? Has the person been sleeping well? Has there been a recent head injury?  Other What medicines does the person take? Does the person use alcohol or drugs on a regular basis? What other symptoms are present?  Tests that may be done include: Chest x-ray Complete blood count  or  blood differential CT scan or MRI of the head Electrocardiogram ( ECG ) Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) Electrolyte panel and liver function tests Toxicology panel and alcohol level Urinalysis Treatment depends on the cause of the decreased alertness. How well a person does depends on the cause of the condition.  The longer the person has had decreased alertness, the worse the outcome. Alternative Names 
 
 Stuporous; Mental status - decreased; Loss of alertness; Decreased consciousness; Changes in consciousness; Obtundation; Coma; Unresponsiveness References 
 
 Bassin BS, Cooke JL. Depressed consciousness and coma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 16. Bassin BS, Cooke JL, Barsan WG. Altered mental status and coma. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 94. Lank PM, Kusin S. Ethanol and opioid intoxication and withdrawal. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 154. Lennihan L. Delirium and Confusion. In: Rowland LP, Pedley TA, eds.  Merritt's Neurology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:chap 2. MacNeill EM, Vashist S. Approach to syncope and altered mental status.  Ped Clin N Am . 2013;60(5):1083-1106. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Central nervous system 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Fainting 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Seizures 
 Shock 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Unconsciousness - first aid 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Concussion - adults - discharge 
 Concussion in children - discharge 
 Preventing head injuries in children 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia