
 Allergic reactions 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Allergic reactions are sensitivities to substances called  allergens  that come into contact with the skin, nose, eyes, respiratory tract, and gastrointestinal tract. They can be breathed into the lungs, swallowed, or injected. Considerations 
 
 Allergic reactions are common. The immune response that causes an allergic reaction is similar to the response that causes hay fever. Most reactions happen soon after contact with an allergen. Many allergic reactions are mild, while others can be severe and life threatening. They can be confined to a small area of the body, or they may affect the entire body. The most severe form is called  anaphylaxis  or anaphylactic shock. Allergic reactions occur more often in people who have a family history of  allergies . Substances that don't bother most people (such as venom from  bee stings  and certain foods, medicines, and pollens) can trigger allergic reactions in certain people. First-time exposure may produce only a mild reaction. Repeated exposures may lead to more serious reactions. Once a person has had an exposure or an allergic reaction (is sensitized), even a very limited exposure to a very small amount of allergen can trigger a severe reaction. Most severe allergic reactions occur within seconds or minutes after exposure to the allergen. Some reactions can occur after several hours, particularly if the allergen causes a reaction after it has been eaten. In very rare cases, reactions develop after 24 hours. Anaphylaxis is a sudden and severe allergic reaction that occurs within minutes of exposure. Immediate medical attention is needed for this condition. Without treatment, anaphylaxis can get worse very quickly and lead to death within 15 minutes. Causes 
 
 Common allergens include: Animal dander Bee stings or stings from other insects Foods, especially nuts, fish, and shellfish Insect bites Medicines Plants Pollens Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of a mild allergic reaction include: Hives  (especially over the neck and face)
    Itching Nasal congestion Rashes Watery, red eyes Symptoms of a moderate or severe reaction include: Abdominal pain Abnormal (high-pitched) breathing sounds Anxiety Chest discomfort or tightness Cough Diarrhea Difficulty breathing, wheezing Difficulty swallowing Dizziness or lightheadedness Flushing or redness of the face Nausea or vomiting Palpitations Swelling of the face, eyes, or tongue Unconsciousness First Aid 
 
 For a mild to moderate reaction: Calm and reassure the person having the reaction. Anxiety can make symptoms worse. Try to identify the allergen and have the person avoid further contact with it. 
  If the person develops an itchy rash, apply cool compresses and an over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream.
   
  Watch the person for signs of increasing distress.
   
  Get medical help. For a mild reaction, a health care provider may recommend over-the-counter medications, such as antihistamines.
   For a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis): Check the person's airway, breathing, and circulation (the ABC's of Basic Life Support). A warning sign of dangerous throat swelling is a very hoarse or whispered voice, or coarse sounds when the person is breathing in air. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and  CPR . 
  Call 911.
   
  Calm and reassure the person.
   
  If the allergic reaction is from a bee sting, scrape the stinger off the skin with something firm (such as a fingernail or plastic credit card). Do not use tweezers -- squeezing the stinger will release more venom.
   
  If the person has emergency allergy medicine on hand, help the person take or inject the medicine. Avoid oral medicine if the person is having difficulty breathing.
   
  Take steps to prevent  shock . Have the person lie flat, raise the person's feet about 12 inches (30 centimeters), and cover them with a coat or blanket. Do not place the person in this position if a head, neck, back, or leg injury is suspected or if it causes discomfort.
   DO NOT 
 
 If a person is having an allergic reaction: Do not assume that any allergy shots the person has already received will provide complete protection. Do not place a pillow under the person's head if he or she is having trouble breathing. This can block the airways. Do not give the person anything by mouth if the person is having trouble breathing. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for medical assistance (911) right away if: The person is having a severe allergic reaction. Do not wait to see if the reaction is getting worse. The person has a history of severe allergic reactions (check for a medical ID tag).  Prevention 
 
 To prevent allergic reactions: Avoid triggers such as foods and medicines that have caused an allergic reaction in the past. Ask detailed questions about ingredients when you are eating away from home. Carefully check ingredient labels. If you have a child who is allergic to certain foods, introduce 1 new food at a time in small amounts so you can recognize an allergic reaction. People who have had serious allergic reactions should wear a medical ID tag and carry emergency medicines (such as a chewable form of Chlor-Trimeton and injectable epinephrine or a bee sting kit) according to your provider's instructions. Do not use your injectable epinephrine on anyone else. They may have a condition (such as a heart problem) that could be made worse by this drug.  Images 
 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Dermatographism - close-up 
 Dermatographism on the arm 
 Hives (urticaria) on the arm 
 Hives (urticaria) on the chest 
 Hives (urticaria) - close-up 
 Hives (urticaria) on the trunk 
 Dermatographism on the back 
 Dermatographism - arm 
 Allergic reactions 
 References 
 
 Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Randolph C, et al. Anaphylaxis -- a practice parameter update 2015.  Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol . 2015;115(5):341-384. PMID: 26505932  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26505932 . Wasserman SI. Approach to the patient with allergic or immunologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 249. Read More 
 
 Allergen 
 Allergies - overview 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Insect bites and stings 
 
 Review Date 3/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Stuart I. Henochowicz, MD, FACP, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia