
 Allergic conjunctivitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The conjunctiva is a clear layer of tissue lining the eyelids and covering the white of the eye. Allergic conjunctivitis occurs when the conjunctiva becomes swollen or inflamed due to a reaction to pollen, dander, mold, or other allergy-causing substances.  Causes 
 
 When your eyes are exposed to allergy-causing substances, a substance called histamine is released by your body. The blood vessels in the  conjunctiva  become swollen. The eyes can become red,  itchy , and  teary  very quickly. The pollens that cause symptoms vary from person to person and from area to area. Tiny, hard-to-see pollens that may cause allergic symptoms include grasses, ragweed and trees. These same pollens may also cause hay fever. Your symptoms may be worse when there is more pollen in the air. Higher levels of pollen are more likely on hot, dry, windy days. On cool, damp, rainy days most pollen is washed to the ground. Mold, animal dander, or dust may cause this problem also. Allergies  tend to run in families. It is hard to know exactly how many people have allergies. Many conditions are often lumped under the term "allergy" even when they might not truly be an allergy.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may be seasonal and can include: Intense itching or  burning eyes Puffy eyelids, most often in the morning Red eyes Stringy eye discharge Tearing (watery eyes) Widened blood vessels in the clear tissue covering the white of the eye  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may look for the following: Certain white blood cells, called eosinophils Small, raised bumps on the inside of the eyelids (papillary conjunctivitis) Positive skin test for suspected allergens on  allergy tests Allergy testing may reveal the pollen or other substances that trigger your symptoms. Skin testing is the most common method of allergy testing. Skin testing is more likely to be done if symptoms do not respond to treatment. Treatment 
 
 The best treatment is to  avoid what causes your allergy symptoms  as much as possible. Common triggers to avoid include dust, mold and pollen. Some things you can do to ease symptoms are: Use lubricating eye drops. Apply cool compresses to the eyes. DO NOT smoke and avoid secondhand smoke. Take over-the-counter oral antihistamines. These medicines can offer more relief, but they can sometimes make your eyes dry.  If home-care does not help, you may need to see a provider for treatments such as eye drops that contain antihistamines or eye drops that reduce swelling. Mild eye steroid drops can be prescribed for more severe reactions. You may also use eye drops that prevent a type of white blood cell called mast cells from causing swelling. These drops are given along with antihistamines. These medicines work best if you take them before you come in contact with the allergen. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms often go away with treatment. However, they can persist if you continue to be exposed to the allergen. Long-term swelling of the outer lining of the eyes may occur in those with chronic allergies or asthma. It is called  vernal conjunctivitis . It is most common in young males, and most often occurs during the spring and summer. Possible Complications 
 
 There are no serious complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis that do not respond to self-care steps and over-the-counter treatment. Your vision is affected. You develop eye pain that is severe or becoming worse. Your eyelids or the skin around your eyes becomes swollen or red. You have a headache in addition to your other symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Conjunctivitis - allergic seasonal/perennial; Atopic keratoconjunctivitis; Pink eye - allergic Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Allergy symptoms 
 Conjunctivitis 
 References 
 
 Rubenstein JB, Tannan A. Allergic conjunctivitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.7.  Stock EL, Meisler DM. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology.  Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4;chap 9. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Conjunctiva 
 Itching 
 Watery eyes 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Pinkeye 
 Browse the Encyclopedia