
 Alström syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alström syndrome is a very rare disease. It is passed down through families (inherited). This disease can lead to  blindness ,  deafness ,  diabetes , and  obesity . Causes 
 
 Alström syndrome is inherited in an  autosomal recessive  manner. This means both your parents must pass on a copy of the defective gene (ALMS1) in order for you to have this disease.  It is unknown how the defective gene causes the disorder. The condition is very rare. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of this condition are: Blindness or severe  vision impairment  in infancy Dark patches of skin (acanthosis nigricans) Deafness Impaired heart function ( cardiomyopathy ), which may lead to heart failure Obesity Progressive kidney failure Slowed growth Symptoms of childhood-onset or type 2 diabetes  Occasionally, the following can also occur: Gastrointestinal reflux Hypothyroidism Liver dysfunction Small penis  Exams and Tests 
 
 An eye doctor (ophthalmologist) will examine the eyes. The person may have reduced vision. Tests may be done to check: Blood sugar levels (to diagnose  hyperglycemia ) Hearing Heart function Thyroid function Triglyceride  levels  Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for this syndrome. Treatment for symptoms may include: Diabetes medicine Hearing aids Heart medicine Thyroid hormone replacement  Support Groups 
 
 Alström Syndrome International --  www.alstrom.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The following are likely to develop: Deafness Permanent blindness Type 2 diabetes  Kidney and liver failure may get worse. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications are: Complications from diabetes Coronary artery disease (from diabetes and high cholesterol) Fatigue and shortness of breath (if poor heart function is not treated)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms of diabetes. Common symptoms of diabetes are increased thirst and urination. Seek medical attention right away if you think that your child cannot see or hear normally. References 
 
 Farooqi IS, O'Rahilly S. Genetic syndromes associated with obesity. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 28. Torres VE, Harris PC. Cystic diseases of the kidney. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 46. Read More 
 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Diabetes 
 Hearing loss 
 Overweight 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia