
 Amniotic fluid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amniotic fluid is a clear, slightly yellowish liquid that surrounds the unborn baby (fetus) during pregnancy. It is contained in the amniotic sac. Information 
 
 While in the womb, the baby floats in the amniotic fluid. The amount of amniotic fluid is greatest at about 34 weeks ( gestation ) into the pregnancy, when it averages 800 mL. About 600 mL of amniotic fluid surrounds the baby at full term (40 weeks gestation). The amniotic fluid constantly moves (circulates) as the baby swallows and "inhales" the fluid, and then releases it. The amniotic fluid helps: The developing baby to move in the womb, which allows for proper bone growth The lungs to develop properly Keep a constant temperature around the baby, protecting from heat loss Protect the baby from outside injury by cushioning sudden blows or movements  Too much amniotic fluid is called  polyhydramnios . This condition can occur with multiple pregnancies (twins or triplets), congenital anomalies (problems that exist when the baby is born), or  gestational diabetes . Too little amniotic fluid is known as oligohydramnios. This condition may occur with late pregnancies, ruptured membranes,  placental dysfunction , or fetal abnormalities. Abnormal amounts of amniotic fluid may cause the health care provider to watch the pregnancy more carefully. Removing a sample of the fluid through  amniocentesis  can provide information about the sex, health, and development of the fetus. Images 
 
 
 Amniocentesis 
 Amniotic fluid 
 Polyhydramnios 
 Amniotic fluid 
 References 
 
 Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, Bloom SL, et al. Embryogenesis and fetal morphological development. In: Cunningham FG, Leveno KL, Bloom SL, et al, eds.  Williams Obstetrics . 24th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2040:chap 7. Gilbert WM. Amniotic fluid disorders. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 33. Ross MG, Ervin MG, Novak D. Placental and fetal physiology. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, at al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 2. 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pregnancy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia