
 Amylase - blood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amylase is an  enzyme  that helps digest carbohydrates. It is made in the pancreas and the glands that make saliva. When the pancreas is diseased or inflamed, amylase releases into the blood. A test can be done to measure the level of this enzyme in your blood. Amylase may also be measured with an  amylase urine test . How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is taken from a vein. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. However, you should avoid alcohol before the test. The health care provider may ask you to stop taking drugs that may affect the test. DO NOT stop taking any medicines without first talking to your provider. Drugs that can increase amylase measurements include: Asparaginase Aspirin Birth control pills Cholinergic medications Ethacrynic acid Methyldopa Opiates (codeine, meperidine, and morphine) Thiazide diuretics  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted to draw blood. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is most often used to diagnose or monitor  acute pancreatitis . It may also detect some digestive tract problems. The test may also be done for the following conditions: Chronic pancreatitis Pancreatic pseudocyst Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is 23 to 85 units per liter (U/L) or 0.38 to 1.42 microkat/L (µkat/L). Some laboratories give a range of 40 to 140 U/L or 0.67 to 2.34 µkat/L. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased blood amylase levels may occur due to: Acute pancreatitis Cancer of the pancreas , ovaries, or lungs Cholecystitis Gallbladder attack caused by disease Gastroenteritis (severe) Infection of the salivary glands (such as  mumps ) or a blockage Intestinal blockage Macroamylasemia Pancreatic or  bile duct blockage Perforated ulcer Tubal pregnancy  (may have burst open) Decreased amylase levels may occur due to: Cancer of the pancreas Damage to the pancreas Kidney disease Toxemia of pregnancy Risks 
 
 Slight risks from having blood drawn may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Tenner S, Steinberg WM. Acute pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Acute pancreatitis 
 Bile duct obstruction 
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Enzyme 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Macroamylasemia 
 Mumps 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Pancreatic pseudocyst 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Preeclampsia 
 
 Review Date 2/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with gastrointestinal specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Pancreatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia