
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, is a disease of the nerve cells in the brain, brain stem and spinal cord that control voluntary muscle movement. ALS is also known as Lou Gehrig disease. Causes 
 
 One out of 10 cases of ALS is due to a genetic defect. The cause is unknown in most other cases. In ALS, motor nerve cells (neurons) waste away or die, and can no longer send messages to muscles. This eventually leads to muscle weakening, twitching, and an inability to move the arms, legs, and body. The condition slowly gets worse. When the muscles in the chest area stop working, it becomes hard or impossible to breathe. ALS affects approximately 5 out of every 100,000 people worldwide. Having a family member who has a hereditary form of the disease is a risk factor for ALS. Other risks include military service. Some risk factors are controversial. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually do not develop until after age 50, but they can start in younger people. People with ALS have a loss of muscle strength and coordination that eventually gets worse and makes it impossible for them to do routine tasks such as going up steps, getting out of a chair, or swallowing. Weakness can first affect the arms or legs, or the ability to breathe or swallow. As the disease gets worse, more muscle groups develop problems. ALS does not affect the senses (sight, smell, taste, hearing, touch). Most people are able to think normally, although a small number develop dementia, causing problems with memory. Muscle weakness starts in one body part, such as the arm or hand, and slowly gets worse until it leads to the following: Difficulty lifting, climbing stairs, and walking Difficulty breathing Difficulty swallowing -- choking easily, drooling, or gagging Head drop due to weakness of the neck muscles Speech problems, such as a slow or abnormal speech pattern (slurring of words) Voice changes, hoarseness Other findings include: Depression Muscle cramps Muscle stiffness, called spasticity Muscle contractions , called fasciculations Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The physical exam may show: Weakness, often beginning in one area Muscle tremors, spasms, twitching, or loss of muscle tissue Twitching of the tongue (common) Abnormal reflexes Stiff or clumsy walk Decreased or increased reflexes at the joints Difficulty controlling crying or laughing (sometimes called emotional incontinence) Loss of gag reflex  Tests that may be done include: 
  Blood tests to rule out other conditions
   
  Breathing test to see if lung muscles are affected
   Cervical spine CT  or MRI to be sure there is no disease or injury to the neck, which can mimic ALS
   Electromyography  to see which nerves or muscles do not work properly
   
  Genetic testing, if there is a family history of ALS
   Head CT  or  MRI  to rule out other conditions
   
  Swallowing studies
   
 Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
   Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for ALS. A medicine called riluzole helps slow the symptoms and helps people live slightly longer. Treatments to control other symptoms include: 
  Baclofen or diazepam for  spasticity  that interferes with daily activities
   
  Trihexyphenidyl or amitriptyline for people with problems swallowing their own saliva
   Physical therapy, rehabilitation, use of braces or a wheelchair, or other measures may be needed to help with muscle function and general health. People with ALS tend to lose weight. The illness itself increases the need for food and calories. At the same time, problems with choking and swallowing make it hard to eat enough. To help with feeding, a tube may be placed into the stomach. A dietitian who specializes in ALS can give advice on healthy eating. Breathing devices include machines that are used only at night, and constant mechanical ventilation. Medicine for depression may be needed if a person with ALS is feeling sad. They also should discuss their wishes regarding artificial ventilation with their families and providers. Support Groups 
 
 Emotional support is vital in coping with the disorder, because mental functioning is not affected.  Groups  such as the ALS Association may be available to help people who are coping with the disorder. Support for people who are caring for someone with ALS is also available, and may be very helpful. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Over time, people with ALS lose the ability to function and care for themselves. Death often occurs within 3 to 5 years of diagnosis. About 1 in 4 people survive for more than 5 years after diagnosis. Some people live much longer, but they typically need help breathing from a ventilator or other device. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of ALS include: Breathing in food or fluid ( aspiration ) Loss of ability to care for self Lung failure Pneumonia Pressure sores Weight loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: 
   You have symptoms of ALS, particularly if you have a family history of the disorder
    
   You or someone else has been diagnosed with ALS and symptoms get worse or new symptoms develop
    Increased difficulty swallowing, difficulty breathing, and episodes of  apnea  are symptoms that require immediate attention. Prevention 
 
 You may want to see a genetic counselor if you have a family history of ALS. Alternative Names 
 
 Lou Gehrig disease; ALS; Upper and lower motor neuron disease; Motor neuron disease Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Fearon C, Murray B, Mitsumoto H. Disorders of upper and lower motor neurons. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 98. Shaw PJ. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other motor neuron diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 419. Read More 
 
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia