
 Anemia caused by low iron - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anemia is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. There are many types of anemia. Iron helps make red blood cells, so a lack of iron in the body may lead to anemia. The medical name of this problem is iron deficiency anemia. Causes 
 
 Anemia caused by a low iron level is the most common form of  anemia . The body gets iron through certain foods. It also reuses iron from old red blood cells. A diet that does not have enough iron is the most common cause of this type of anemia in children. When a child is growing rapidly, such as during puberty, even more iron is needed. Toddlers who drink too much cow's milk may also become anemic if they are not eating other healthy foods that have iron. Other causes may be: The body is not able to absorb iron well, even though the child is eating enough iron Slow blood loss over a long period, often due to menstrual periods or bleeding in the digestive tract Iron deficiency in children can also be related to  lead poisoning . Symptoms 
 
 Mild anemia may have no symptoms. As the iron level and blood counts become lower, your child may: Act irritable Become  short of breath Crave unusual foods Eat less food Feel tired  or  weak  all the time Have a sore tongue Have  headaches  or dizziness  With more severe anemia, your child may have: Blue-tinged or very pale whites of eyes Brittle nails Pale skin Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Blood tests that measure iron level in the body include: Hematocrit Serum ferritin Serum iron Total iron binding capacity  (TIBC)  A measurement called iron saturation (serum iron/TIBC) often can show whether the child has enough iron in the body. Treatment 
 
 Since children only absorb a small amount of the iron they eat, most children need to have 8 to 10 mg of iron per day.  Eating healthy foods is the most important way to prevent and treat iron deficiency. Good sources of iron include: Apricots Chicken, turkey, fish, and other meats Dried beans, lentils, and soybeans Eggs Liver Molasses Oatmeal Peanut butter Prune juice Raisins and prunes Spinach, kale and other greens  If a healthy diet does not prevent or treat your child's low iron level and anemia, the doctor will likely recommend iron supplements for your child. These are taken by mouth. DO NOT give your child iron supplements or vitamins with iron without checking with your child's doctor. The doctor will prescribe the right kind of supplement for your child. If your child takes too much iron, it can cause poisoning.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, the outcome is likely to be good. In most cases, the blood counts will return to normal in 2 months. It is important that the doctor find the cause of your child's iron deficiency. Possible Complications 
 
 Anemia caused by a low iron level can affect a child's ability to learn in school. A low iron level can cause decreased attention span, reduced alertness, and learning problems in children. A low iron level can cause the body to absorb too much lead. Prevention 
 
 Eating a variety of healthy foods is the most important way to prevent and treat iron deficiency. Alternative Names 
 
 Anemia - iron deficiency - children Images 
 
 
 Red blood cells, target cells 
 Formed elements of blood 
 Hemoglobin 
 References 
 
 Fleming MD. Disorders of iron and copper metabolism, the sideroblastic anemias, and lead toxicity. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, Look AT, Lux SE, Nathan DG, eds.  Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 11. Sills R. Iron-deficiency anemia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 455. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Hemoglobin 
 Lead poisoning 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Iron 
 Browse the Encyclopedia