
 Anemia caused by low iron - infants and toddlers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
Anemia is a problem in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells bring oxygen to body tissues. Iron helps make red blood cells, so a lack of iron in the body may lead to anemia. The medical name of this problem is iron deficiency anemia. Causes 
 
 
 
Anemia caused by a low iron level is the most common form of anemia. The body gets iron through certain foods. It also reuses iron from old red blood cells. A diet that does not have enough iron is the most common cause. During periods of rapid growth, even more iron is needed. Babies are born with iron stored in their bodies. Because they grow rapidly, infants and toddlers need to absorb a lot of iron each day. Iron deficiency anemia most commonly affects babies 9 through 24 months old.  Breastfed babies need less iron because iron is absorbed better when it is in breast milk. Formula with iron added (iron fortified) also provides enough iron. Infants younger than 12 months who drink cow's milk rather than breast milk or iron-fortified formula are more likely to have anemia. Cow's milk leads to anemia because it: Has less iron Causes small amounts of blood loss from the intestines Makes it harder for the body to absorb iron Children older than 12 months who drink too much cow's milk may also have anemia if they do not eat enough other healthy foods that have iron. Symptoms 
 
 

Mild anemia may have no symptoms. As the iron level and blood counts become lower, your infant or toddler may: Act irritable Become short of breath Crave unusual foods (called pica) Eat less food Feel tired or weak all the time Have a sore tongue Have headaches or dizziness With more severe anemia, your child may have: Blue-tinged or pale whites of eyes Brittle nails Pale skin color  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. All babies should have a blood test to check for anemia. Blood tests that measure iron level in the body include: Hematocrit Serum ferritin Serum iron Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) A measurement called iron saturation (serum iron/TIBC) often can show whether the child has enough iron in the body. Treatment 
 
 Since children only absorb a small amount of the iron they eat, most children need to have 8 to 10 mg of iron per day.  DIET AND IRON During the first year of life: Do not give your baby cow's milk until age 1 year. Babies under age 1 have a difficult time digesting cow's milk. Use either breast milk or formula fortified with iron. After 6 months, your baby will start to need more iron in their diet. Start solid foods with iron-fortified baby cereal mixed with breast milk or formula. Iron-rich pureed meats, fruits, and vegetables can also be started.  After age 1 year, you may give your baby whole milk in place of breast milk or formula. Eating healthy foods is the most important way to prevent and treat iron deficiency. Good sources of iron include: Apricots Chicken, turkey, fish, and other meats Dried beans, lentils, and soybeans Eggs Liver Molasses Oatmeal Peanut butter Prune juice Raisins and prunes Spinach, kale and other greens  IRON SUPPLEMENTS If a healthy diet does not prevent or treat your child's low iron level and anemia, the health care provider will likely recommend iron supplements for your child. These are taken by mouth. Do not give your child iron supplements or vitamins with iron without checking with your child's provider. The provider will prescribe the right kind of supplement for your child. If your child takes too much iron, it can cause poisoning. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, the outcome is likely to be good. In most cases, the blood counts will return to normal in 2 months. It is important that the doctor find the cause of your child's iron deficiency. Possible Complications 
 
 A low iron level can cause decreased attention span, reduced alertness and learning problems in children. A low iron level can cause the body to absorb too much lead. Prevention 
 
 Eating healthy foods is the most important way to prevent and treat iron deficiency. Alternative Names 
 
 Anemia - iron deficiency - infants and toddlers References 
 
 Baker RD, Greer FR; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Nutrition. Diagnosis and prevention of iron deficiency and iron-deficiency anemia in infants and young children (0-3 years of age).  Pediatrics.  2010;126(5):1040-1050. PMID: 20923825  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20923825 . 
  Baker RD, Baker SS. Infant and toddler nutrition. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds.  Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 16. Sills R. Iron-deficiency anemia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 455. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Iron 
 Toddler Health 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia