
 Anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anemia is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. Different types of anemia include: Anemia due to B12 deficiency Anemia due to folate deficiency Anemia due to iron deficiency Anemia of chronic disease Hemolytic anemia Idiopathic aplastic anemia Megaloblastic anemia Pernicious anemia Sickle cell anemia Thalassemia Causes 
 
 Although many parts of the body help make red blood cells, most of the work is done in the bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft tissue in the center of bones that helps form all blood cells. Healthy red blood cells last between 90 and 120 days. Parts of your body then remove old blood cells. A hormone called erythropoietin (epo) made in your kidneys signals your bone marrow to make more red blood cells. Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying protein inside red blood cells. It gives red blood cells their color. People with anemia do not have enough hemoglobin. The body needs certain vitamins, minerals, and nutrients to make enough red blood cells. Iron, vitamin B12, and folic acid are 3 of the most important ones. The body may not have enough of these nutrients due to: Changes in the lining of the stomach or intestines affect how well nutrients are absorbed (for example,  celiac disease ) Poor diet Surgery that removes part of the stomach or intestines  Possible causes of anemia include: Certain medicines Destruction of red blood cells  earlier than normal (which may be caused by immune system problems) Long-term (chronic) diseases such as chronic kidney disease, cancer, ulcerative colitis, or rheumatoid arthritis Some forms of anemia, such as thalassemia or sickle cell anemia, which can be inherited Pregnancy Problems with bone marrow such as lymphoma, leukemia, myelodysplasia, multiple myeloma, or  aplastic anemia Slow blood loss (for example, from heavy menstrual periods or  stomach ulcers )
    Sudden heavy blood loss Symptoms 
 
 You may have no symptoms if the anemia is mild or if the problem develops slowly. Symptoms that may occur first include: Feeling weak or tired more often than usual, or with exercise Headaches Problems concentrating or thinking  If the anemia gets worse, symptoms may include: Blue color to the whites of the eyes Brittle nails Desire to eat ice or other non-food things ( pica  syndrome) Lightheadedness when you stand up Pale skin color Shortness of breath  with mild activity or even at rest Sore tongue  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical examination, and may find: A heart murmur Low blood pressure, especially when you stand up Pale skin Rapid heart rate  Some types of anemia may cause other findings on a physical exam. Blood tests used to diagnose some common types of anemia may include: Blood levels of iron, vitamin B12, folic acid, and other vitamins and minerals Red blood count  and  hemoglobin level Reticulocyte count Other tests may be done to find medical problems that can cause anemia. Treatment 
 
 Treatment should be directed at the cause of the anemia, and may include: Blood transfusions Corticosteroids or other medicines that suppress the immune system Erythropoietin, a medicine that helps your bone marrow make more blood cells Supplements of iron, vitamin B12, folic acid, or other vitamins and minerals  Possible Complications 
 
 Severe anemia can cause low oxygen levels in vital organs such as the heart, and can lead to a  heart attack . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any symptoms of anemia or unusual bleeding. Images 
 
 
 Red blood cells, elliptocytosis 
 Red blood cells, spherocytosis 
 Red blood cells, multiple sickle cells 
 Ovalocytoses 
 Red blood cells, sickle and Pappenheimer 
 Red blood cells, target cells 
 Hemoglobin 
 References 
 
 Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 158. Marks PW. Approach to anemia in the adult and child. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 32. Read More 
 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Folate-deficiency anemia 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Heart attack 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Immune hemolytic anemia 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia