
 Anencephaly 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anencephaly is the absence of a large part of the brain and the skull. Causes 
 
 Anencephaly is one of the most common neural tube defects. Neural tube defects are birth defects that affect the tissue that becomes the spinal cord and brain. Anencephaly occurs early in the development of an unborn baby. It results when the upper part of the neural tube fails to close. Why this happens is not known. Possible causes include environmental  toxins  and low intake of  folic acid  by the mother during pregnancy. The exact number of cases of anencephaly is unknown, because many of these pregnancies result in miscarriage. Having 1 infant with this condition increases the risk of having another child with neural tube defects. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of anencephaly are: Absence of the skull Absence of parts of the brain Facial feature abnormalities Heart defects  Exams and Tests 
 
 An  ultrasound  during pregnancy is done to confirm the diagnosis. The ultrasound may reveal too much fluid in the uterus. This condition is called  polyhydramnios . The mother may also have these tests during pregnancy: Amniocentesis  (to look for increased levels of  alpha-fetoprotein ) Alpha-fetoprotein level (increased levels suggest a neural tube defect) Urine estriol level  A pre-pregnancy serum folic acid test may also be done. Treatment 
 
 There is no current treatment. Talk to your health care provider about care decisions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition usually causes death within a few days after birth. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 A provider usually detects this condition during routine prenatal testing and ultrasound. Otherwise, it is recognized at birth. If anencephaly is detected before birth, further counseling will be needed. Prevention 
 
 There is good evidence that folic acid can help reduce the risk of certain birth defects, including anencephaly. Women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should take a multivitamin with folic acid every day. Many foods are now fortified with folic acid to help prevent these kinds of birth defects. Getting enough folic acid can cut the chance of neural tube defects in half. For specific recommendations, see  folic acid (folate) . Alternative Names 
 
 Aprosencephaly with open cranium Images 
 
 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - ventricles of brain 
 References 
 
 Finnell RH, George TM, Mitchell LE. Neural tube defects. In: Rimoin D, Pyeritz RE, Korf B, eds.  Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics . 6th ed. Elsevier Ltd; 2013:chap 114. Kinsman SL, Johnston MV. Congenital anomalies of the central nervous system. In: Kliegman, RM, Behrman RE, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 585. Read More 
 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Toxins 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neural Tube Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia