
 Annular pancreas 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An annular pancreas is a ring of pancreatic tissue that encircles the  duodenum  (the first part of the small intestine). The normal position of the pancreas is next to, but not surrounding the duodenum. Causes 
 
 Annular pancreas is problem present at birth (congenital defect). Symptoms occur when the ring of pancreas squeezes and narrows the small intestine so that food cannot pass easily or at all. Newborns may have symptoms of complete blockage of the intestine. However, up to half of people with this condition do not have symptoms until adulthood. There are also cases that are not detected because the symptoms are mild. Conditions that may be associated with annular pancreas include: Down syndrome Excess amniotic fluid during pregnancy  (polyhydramnios) Other congenital gastrointestinal problems Pancreatitis  Symptoms 
 
 Newborns may not feed well. They may spit up more than normal, not drink enough breast milk or formula, and cry. Adult symptoms may include: Fullness after eating Nausea or vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests include: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal x-ray CT scan Upper GI and small bowel series Treatment 
 
 Treatment most often involves surgery to bypass the blocked part of the duodenum. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is most often good with surgery. Adults with an annular pancreas are at increased risk for pancreatic or biliary tract cancer. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Obstructive jaundice Pancreatic cancer Pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas) Peptic ulcer Perforation (tearing a hole) of the intestine due to obstruction Peritonitis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child has any symptoms of annular pancreas. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Annular pancreas 
 References 
 
 Bales C, Liacouras CA. Intestinal atresia, stenosis, and malrotation. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 330. Semrin MG, Russo MA. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the stomach and duodenum. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Duodenum 
 Incidence 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia