
 Anoscopy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anoscopy is a method to look at the:  Anus Anal canal Lower rectum How the Test is Performed 
 
 The procedure is usually done in a doctor's office. A  digital rectal exam  is done first. Then, a lubricated instrument called an anoscope is placed a few inches or centimeters into the rectum. You will feel some discomfort when this is done. The anoscope has a light on the end, so your health care provider can see the entire area. A sample for  biopsy  can be taken, if needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Often, there is no preparation needed. Or, you may receive a laxative, enema, or other preparation to empty your bowel. You should empty your bladder before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There will be some discomfort during the procedure. You may feel the need to have a bowel movement. You may feel a pinch when a biopsy is taken.  You can usually return to normal activities after the procedure. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be used to determine whether you have: Anal fissures Anal polyps Foreign object in the anus Hemorrhoids Infection Inflammation Tumors  Normal Results 
 
 The anal canal appears normal in size, color, and tone. There is no sign of:  Bleeding Polyps Hemorrhoids Other abnormal tissue What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may include: Abscess Fissures Foreign object in the anus Hemorrhoids Infection Inflammation Polyps (non-cancerous or cancerous) Tumors  Risks 
 
 There are few risks. If a biopsy is needed, there is a slight risk of bleeding and mild pain. Alternative Names 
 
 Anal fissures - anoscopy; Anal polyps - anoscopy; Foreign object in the anus - anoscopy; Hemorrhoids - anoscopy; Anal warts - anoscopy Images 
 
 
 Rectal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Nyberg SM. Anoscopy. In: Dehn RW, Asprey DP, eds.  Essential Clinical Procedures . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Anal fissure 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Hemorrhoids 
 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anal Cancer 
 Anal Disorders 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia