
 Antinuclear antibody panel 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The antinuclear antibody panel is a blood test that looks at antinuclear  antibodies 
(ANA). ANA are substances produced by the immune system that attack the body's own tissues. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Blood is drawn from a vein. Most often, a vein on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand is used. The site is cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). The health care provider wraps an elastic band around the upper arm to apply pressure to the area and make the vein swell with blood. Next, the provider gently inserts a needle into the vein. The blood collects into an airtight vial or tube attached to the needle. The elastic band is removed from your arm. Once the blood has been collected, the needle is removed, and the puncture site is covered to stop any bleeding. In infants or young children, a sharp tool called a lancet may be used to puncture the skin and make it bleed. The blood collects into a small glass tube called a pipette, or onto a slide or test strip. A bandage may be placed over the area if there is any bleeding. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. However, certain drugs, including birth control pills, procainamind, and thiazide diurectics, affect the accuracy of this test. Make sure your provider knows about all the medicines you take. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test if you have signs of an autoimmune disorder, particularly  systemic lupus erythematosus . This test may be done if you have unexplained symptoms such as  arthritis , rashes, or chest pain. Normal Results 
 
 Some normal people have a low level of ANA. Thus, the presence of a low level of ANA is not always abnormal. ANA is reported as a "titer". Low titers are in the range of 1:40 to 1:60. A positive ANA test is much more significant if you also have antibodies against the double-stranded form of DNA. The presence of ANA does not confirm a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE). However, a lack of ANA makes that diagnosis much less likely. Although ANA are most often identified with SLE, a positive ANA test can also be a sign of other autoimmune diseases. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. Further tests can be run on blood with a positive ANA test to get more information. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The presence of ANA in the blood may be due to: Chronic  liver disease Collagen vascular disease Drug-induced lupus erythematosus Myositis  (inflammatory muscle disease) Rheumatoid arthritis Sjögren syndrome Systemic lupus erythematosus  Increased ANA level may sometimes be seen in people with: Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) Thyroid disease Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Considerations 
 
 Your doctor will use the results of the ANA panel to help make a diagnosis. The tests alone however do not make a diagnosis, but must be used along with your medical history, physical exam and other tests. The ANA can be positive in relatives of people with SLE who do not have SLE themselves. There is a very low chance of developing systemic lupus erythematosus at some time later in life if the only finding is a low titer of ANA.  Alternative Names 
 
 ANA; ANA panel; ANA reflexive panel Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Alberto von Muhlen C, Nakamura RM. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Arthritis 
 Collagen vascular disease 
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus 
 Liver disease 
 Scleroderma 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Toxins 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Lupus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia