
 Apgar score 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Apgar is a quick test performed on a baby at 1 and 5 minutes after birth. The 1-minute score determines how well the baby tolerated the birthing process. The 5-minute score tells the doctor how well the baby is doing outside the mother's womb. In rare cases, the test will be done 10 minutes after birth.  Virginia Apgar, MD (1909-1974) introduced the Apgar score in 1952. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The Apgar test is done by a doctor, midwife, or nurse. The health care provider examines the baby's: Breathing effort Heart rate Muscle tone Reflexes Skin color  Each category is scored with 0, 1, or 2, depending on the observed condition. Breathing effort:  If the infant is not breathing, the respiratory score is 0. If the respirations are slow or irregular, the infant scores 1 for respiratory effort. If the infant cries well, the respiratory score is 2.  Heart rate is evaluated by stethoscope. This is the most important assessment:  If there is no heartbeat, the infant scores 0 for heart rate. If heart rate is less than 100 beats per minute, the infant scores 1 for heart rate. If heart rate is greater than 100 beats per minute, the infant scores 2 for heart rate.  Muscle tone:  If muscles are loose and floppy, the infant scores 0 for muscle tone. If there is some muscle tone, the infant scores 1. If there is active motion, the infant scores 2 for muscle tone.  Grimace response or reflex irritability is a term describing response to stimulation, such as a mild pinch:  If there is no reaction, the infant scores 0 for reflex irritability. If there is grimacing, the infant scores 1 for reflex irritability. If there is grimacing and a cough, sneeze, or vigorous cry, the infant scores 2 for reflex irritability.  Skin color:  If the skin color is pale blue, the infant scores 0 for color. If the body is pink and the extremities are blue, the infant scores 1 for color. If the entire body is pink, the infant scores 2 for color.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to determine whether a newborn needs help breathing or is having heart trouble.  Normal Results 
 
 The Apgar score is based on a total score of 1 to 10. The higher the score, the better the baby is doing after birth.  A score of 7, 8, or 9 is normal and is a sign that the newborn is in good health. A score of 10 is very unusual, since almost all newborns lose 1 point for blue hands and feet, which is normal for after birth. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Any score lower than 7 is a sign that the baby needs medical attention. The lower the score, the more help the baby needs to adjust outside the mother's womb.  Most of the time a low Apgar score is caused by: Difficult birth C-section Fluid in the baby's airway  A baby with a low Apgar score may need: Oxygen and clearing out the airway to help with breathing Physical stimulation to get the heart beating at a healthy rate  Most of the time, a low score at 1 minute is near-normal by 5 minutes.  A lower Apgar score does not mean a child will have serious or long-term health problems. The Apgar score is not designed to predict the future health of the child.  Alternative Names 
 
 Newborn scoring Images 
 
 
 Infant care following delivery 
 Newborn test 
 References 
 
 Carlo WA. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JF III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88. Rozance PJ, Rosenberg AA. The neonate. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al., eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Read More 
 
 Newborn screening tests 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Newborn Screening 
 Browse the Encyclopedia