
 Aplastic anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aplastic  anemia  is a condition in which the bone marrow does not make enough blood cells. Bone marrow is the soft, tissue in the center of bones that is responsible for producing blood cells and platelets. Causes 
 
 Aplastic anemia results from damage to the blood stem cells. Stem cells are immature cells in the bone marrow that give rise to all blood cell types (red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets). Injury to the stem cells leads to a decrease in the number of these blood cell types. Aplastic anemia can be caused by: Use of certain drugs or exposure to toxic chemicals (such as benzene) Exposure to radiation or chemotherapy Autoimmune disorders Pregnancy Viruses Sometimes, the cause is unknown. In this case, the disorder is called idiopathic aplastic anemia. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are due to the underproduction of red cells, white cells, and platelets. Symptoms may be severe from the start or gradually worsen over time as the disease progresses. Low red cell count (anemia) can cause: Fatigue Pallor  (paleness) Rapid heart rate Shortness of breath  with exercise Weakness Lightheadedness upon standing  Low white cell count (leukopenia) causes an increased risk for infection. Low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) can result in bleeding. Symptoms include: Bleeding gums Easy bruising Frequent or severe infections Nose bleeds Rash, small pinpoint red marks on the skin (petechiae)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests will show: Low  red blood cell count  (anemia) Low  white blood cell count  (leukopenia) Low  reticulocyte count  (reticulocytes are immature red blood cell) Low  platelet count  (thrombocytopenia)  A  bone marrow biopsy  shows fewer-than-normal blood cells and an increased amount of fat. Treatment 
 
 Mild cases of aplastic anemia that do not have symptoms may not require treatment. As blood cell counts become lower and symptoms develop, blood and platelets are given through transfusions. Over time, transfusions may stop working, resulting in very low blood cell counts. This is a life-threatening condition. Bone marrow , or stem cell transplant may be recommended for people under age 40. This treatment works best when the donor is a fully-matched brother or sister. This is called a matched sibling donor. Older people and those who do not have a matched sibling donor are given medicine to suppress the immune system. These medicines may allow the bone marrow to once again make healthy blood cells. But the disease may return (relapse). A bone marrow transplant with an unrelated donor may be tried if these medicines do not help or if the disease comes back after getting better. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Untreated, severe aplastic anemia leads to rapid death. Bone marrow transplant can be very successful in young people. Transplant is also used in older people or when the disease comes back after medicines have stopped working. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Severe infections or bleeding Complications of bone marrow transplant Reactions to medicines Hemochromatosis (buildup of too much iron in the body tissues from many red cell transfusions)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or go to the emergency room if bleeding occurs for no reason, or if bleeding is hard to stop. Call if you notice frequent infections or unusual fatigue. Alternative Names 
 
 Hypoplastic anemia; Bone marrow failure - aplastic anemia Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Bagby GC. Aplastic anemia and related bone marrow failure states. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 165. Young NS, Maciejewski JP. Aplastic anemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Anemia 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Chemotherapy 
 Chronic 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Radiation therapy 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 Toxins 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aplastic Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia