
 Apolipoprotein CII 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Apolipoprotein CII (apoCII) is a protein found in large fat particles that the gastrointestinal tract absorbs. It is also found in very low density lipoprotein ( VLDL ), which is made up of mostly triglycerides (a type of fat in your blood). This article discusses the test used to check for apoCII in a sample of your blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be told not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, you may feel some pain, or only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing where the needle was inserted. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 ApoCII measurements can help determine the type or cause of high blood fats. It is not clear whether the test results improve treatment. Because of this, most health insurance companies will not pay for the test. If you DO NOT have high cholesterol or heart disease or a family history of these conditions, this test may not be recommended for you. Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is 3 to 5 mg/dL. However, apoCII results are usually reported as present or absent. The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 High levels of apoCII may be due to a family history of  lipoprotein lipase deficiency . This is a condition in which the body does not break down fats normally. ApoCII levels are also seen in people with a rare condition called familial apoprotein CII deficiency. This causes  chylomicronemia syndrome , another condition in which the body does not break down fats normally. Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Considerations 
 
 Apolipoprotein measurements may provide more detail about your risk for heart disease, but the added value of this test beyond a lipid panel is unknown. Alternative Names 
 
 ApoCII; Apoprotein CII; ApoC2; Lipoprotein lipase deficiency - apolipoprotein CII; Chylomicronemia syndrome - apolipoprotein CII Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Robinson JG. What is the role of advanced lipoprotein analysis in practice?  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(25):2607-2615. PMID: 23257303  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23257303 . Semenkovich CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Enzyme 
 Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency 
 Heart attack 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 Metabolism 
 Protein in diet 
 Triglyceride level 
 VLDL test 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Angina 
 Cholesterol 
 Heart Attack 
 Browse the Encyclopedia