
 Appetite - decreased 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A decreased appetite is when your desire to eat is reduced. The medical term for a loss of appetite is anorexia. Considerations 
 
 Any illness can reduce appetite. If the illness is treatable, the appetite should return when the condition is cured. Loss of appetite can cause  weight loss . Causes 
 
 A decreased appetite is almost always seen in older adults. Often, no physical cause is found. Emotions such as sadness, depression, or grief can lead to a loss of appetite. Cancer can also cause decreased appetite. You may lose weight without trying. Cancers that may cause you to lose your appetite include: Colon cancer Ovarian cancer Stomach cancer Pancreatic cancer  Other causes of decreased appetite include: Chronic liver disease Chronic kidney disease Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Dementia Heart failure Hepatitis HIV 
   Overactive thyroid ( hypothyroidism ) Pregnancy (first trimester) Use of certain medicines, including antibiotics, chemotherapy drugs, codeine, and morphine Use of street drugs, including amphetamines (speed), cocaine, and heroin Home Care 
 
 People with cancer or a chronic illness need to increase their  protein  and calorie intake by eating high-calorie, nutritious snacks or several small meals during the day. Liquid protein drinks may be helpful. Family members should try to supply favorite foods to help stimulate the person's appetite. Keep a record of what you eat and drink for 24 hours. This is called a diet history. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you are losing a lot of weight without trying. Seek medical help if decreased appetite occurs along with other signs of depression, drug or alcohol use, or an eating disorder. For loss of appetite caused by medicines, ask your provider about changing the dosage or medicine. Do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and will check your height and weight. You'll be asked about diet and medical history. Questions may include: Is the decreased appetite severe or mild? Have you lost any weight? How much? Is the decreased appetite a new symptom? If so, did it start after an upsetting event, such as the death of a family member or friend? What other symptoms are present? Tests that may be done include imaging tests, such as x-ray or ultrasound. Blood and urine tests may also be ordered. In cases of severe malnutrition, nutrients are given through a vein (intravenously). This may require a hospital stay. Alternative Names 
 
 Loss of appetite; Decreased appetite; Anorexia References 
 
 Baracos VE. What therapeutic strategies are effective in improving anorexia and weight loss in nonmalignant disease? In: Goldstein NE, Morrison RS, eds.  Evidence-Based Practice of Palliative Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 29. Mason JB. Nutritional principles and assessment of the gastroenterology patient. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 5. Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Read More 
 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia