
 Arterial insufficiency 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Arterial insufficiency is any condition that slows or stops the flow of blood through your arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to other places in your body. Causes 
 
 One of the most common causes of arterial insufficiency is  atherosclerosis  or "hardening of the arteries." Fatty material (called plaque) builds up on the walls of your arteries. This causes them to become narrow and stiff. As a result, it is hard for blood to flow through your arteries. Blood flow may be suddenly stopped due to a  blood clot . Clots can form on the plaque or travel from another place in the heart or artery (also called embolus).  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on where your arteries become narrowed: If it affects your heart arteries, you may have  chest pain  or a  heart attack . If it affects your brain arteries, you may have a  stroke . If it affects the arteries that bring blood to your legs, you may have frequent  leg cramping when you walk . If it affects the arteries in your belly area, you may have  pain after you eat . Images 
 
 
 Arteries of the brain 
 Developmental process of atherosclerosis 
 References 
 
 Hansson GK, Hamsten A. Atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 70. Libby P. The vascular biology of atherosclerosis. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Stroke 
 Venous insufficiency 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia