
 Asymptomatic bacteriuria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Most of the time, your urine is sterile. This means there is no bacteria growing. On the other hand, if you have symptoms of a  bladder or kidney infection , bacteria will be present and growing in your urine. Sometimes, your health care provider may check your urine for bacteria even when you do not have any symptoms. If enough bacteria are found in your urine, you have asymptomatic bacteriuria. Causes 
 
 Asymptomatic bacteriuria occurs in a small number of healthy people. It affects women more often than men. The reasons for the lack of symptoms are not well understood. You are more likely to have this problem if you: Have a  urinary catheter  in place Are female Are pregnant Are sexually active (in females) Have long-term diabetes and are female Are older adults Have recently had a surgical procedure in your urinary tract Symptoms 
 
 There are no symptoms of this problem. If you have these symptoms, you may have a urinary tract infection but you DO NOT have asymptomatic bacteriuria. Burning during urination Increased  urgency to urinate Increased frequency of urination Exams and Tests 
 
 To diagnose asymptomatic bacteriuria, a urine sample must be sent for a  urine culture . Most people with no urinary tract symptoms do not need this test. You may need a urine culture done as a screening test even without symptoms if: You are pregnant You have a surgery or procedure planned that involves bladder, prostate, or other parts of the urinary tract 
To make the diagnosis of asymptomatic bacteriuria, the culture must show a large growth of bacteria. In men, only one culture needs to show growth of bacteria In women, two different cultures must show growth of bacteria Treatment 
 
 Most people who have bacteria growing in their urine, but no symptoms, do not need treatment. This is because the bacteria are not causing any harm. In fact, treating most people with this problem may make it harder to treat infections in the future. However, for some people getting a urinary tract infection is more likely or may cause more severe problems. As a result, treatment with antibiotics may be needed if: You are pregnant. You had a kidney transplant recently. You are scheduled for surgery involving the prostate gland, the bladder and those with infected kidney stones. Young children with  reflux  (backward movement of urine from the bladder into ureters or kidneys). Without symptoms being present, even those who are older adults, have diabetes, or have a catheter in place, do not need treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 If it is not treated, you may have a kidney infection if you are at high risk. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Difficulty emptying your bladder Fever Flank or back pain Pain with urination You will need to be checked for a bladder or kidney infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Screening - asymptomatic bacteria Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 Vesicoureteral reflux 
 References 
 
 Dull RB, Friedman SK, Risoldi ZM, Rice EC, Starlin RC, Destache CJ. Antimicrobial treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in noncatheterized adults: a systematic review.  Pharmacotherapy . 2014;34(9):941-960. PMID: 24807583  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24807583 . Schaeffer AJ, Matulewicz RS, Klumpp DJ. Infections of the urinary tract. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Zalmanovici Trestioreanu A, Lador A, Sauerbrun-Cutler MT, Leibovici L. Antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;4:CD009534. PMID: 25851268  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25851268 . Read More 
 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia