
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Atheroembolic renal disease (AERD) occurs when small particles made of hardened cholesterol and fat spread to the small blood vessels of the kidneys. Causes 
 
 AERD is linked to  atherosclerosis . Atherosclerosis is a common disorder of the arteries. It occurs when fat, cholesterol, and other substances build up in the walls of arteries and form a hard substance called plaque. In AERD, cholesterol crystals break off from the plaque lining the arteries. These crystals move into the bloodstream. Once in circulation, the crystals get stuck in tiny blood vessels called arterioles. There, they reduce blood flow to tissues and cause swelling (inflammation) and tissue damage that can harm the kidneys or other parts of the body.  Acute arterial occlusion  occurs when the artery that supplies blood to the kidney suddenly becomes blocked. The kidneys are involved about half of the time. Other body parts that may be involved include the skin, eyes, muscles and bones, brain and nerves, and organs in the abdomen.  Acute kidney failure  is possible if the blockages of the kidney blood vessels are severe. Atherosclerosis of the aorta is the most common cause of AERD. The cholesterol crystals may also break off during  aortic angiography ,  cardiac catheterization , or surgery of the aorta or other major arteries. In some cases, AERD may occur without a known cause. The risk factors for AERD are the same as risk factors for atherosclerosis, including age, male gender, cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, and diabetes. Alternative Names 
 
 Renal disease - atheroembolic; Cholesterol embolization syndrome; Atheroemboli - renal; Atherosclerotic disease - renal Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 DuBose TD Jr, Santos RM. Vascular disorders of the kidney. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Textbook of Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 127. Ruggenenti P, Cravedi P, Remuzzi G. Microvascular and macrovascular diseases of the kidney. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu A, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA; Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 34. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Blood clots 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 High blood pressure 
 
 Review Date 11/26/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg DO, Private Practice specializing in Nephrology, Affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia