
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Autoimmune hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. It occurs when immune cells mistake the liver's normal cells for harmful invaders and attack them. Causes 
 
 This form of hepatitis is an  autoimmune disease . The body's immune system cannot tell the difference between healthy body tissue and harmful, outside substances. The result is an immune response that destroys normal body tissues. Liver inflammation, or hepatitis, may occur along with other autoimmune diseases. These include: Graves disease Inflammatory bowel disease Rheumatoid arthritis Scleroderma Sjogren syndrome Systemic lupus erythematosus Thyroiditis Type 1 diabetes Ulcerative colitis Autoimmune hepatitis may occur in family members of people with autoimmune diseases. There may be a genetic cause. This disease is most common in young girls and women. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal distention Dark urine Fatigue General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Itching Loss of appetite Nausea or vomiting Pale or clay-colored stools Absence of menstruation (amenorrhea) may also be a symptom. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests for autoimmune hepatitis include: Anti-liver kidney  microsome type 1 antibody  (anti LKM-1) Anti-nuclear antibody ( ANA ) Anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA) Serum IgG Liver function tests Liver biopsy to look for chronic hepatitis  Treatment 
 
 You may need prednisone or other corticosteroid medicines help reduce the inflammation. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine are drugs used to treat other autoimmune disorders. They have been shown to help people with autoimmune hepatitis, as well. Some people may need a liver transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies. Corticosteroid medicines may slow the progress of the disease. However, autoimmune hepatitis may advance to cirrhosis. This would require a liver transplant. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cirrhosis Side effects from steroids and other medicines Hepatocellular carcinoma Liver failure  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis. Prevention 
 
 Autoimmune hepatitis cannot be prevented in most cases. Knowing the risk factors may help you detect and treat the disease early.  Alternative Names 
 
 Lupoid hepatitis; Chronic acute liver disease Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Czaia AJ. Autoimmune hepatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 88.  Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Cirrhosis 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Mesenteric venous thrombosis 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Hepatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia