
 Autoimmune liver disease panel 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An autoimmune liver disease panel is a group of tests that is done to check for autoimmune liver disease. An autoimmune liver disease means that the body's immune system attacks the liver. These tests include: Anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibodies Anti-mitochondrial antibodies Anti-nuclear antibodies Anti-smooth muscle antibodies  The panel may also include other tests. Often, immune protein levels in the blood are also checked.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is taken from a  vein . The blood sample is sent to the lab for testing. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You do not need to take special steps before this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted to draw blood. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Autoimmune disorders are a possible cause of liver disease. The most common of these diseases are autoimmune hepatitis and primary biliary cirrhosis. This group of tests helps your health care provider diagnose liver disease. Normal Results 
 
 Protein levels: The normal range for protein levels in the blood will change with each laboratory. Please check with your health care provider for the normal ranges in your particular laboratory. Antibodies: Negative results on all antibodies are normal. Note:  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Blood tests for autoimmune diseases are not wholly accurate. They can have false negative results (you have the disease, but the test is negative) and false positive results (you do not have the disease, but the test is positive). A weakly positive or low titer positive test for autoimmune disease is often not due to any disease. A positive test on the panel may be a sign of autoimmune hepatitis or other autoimmune liver disease. If the test is positive mostly for anti-mitochondrial antibodies, you are likely to have primary biliary cirrhosis. If the immune proteins are high and albumin is low, you may have liver cirrhosis or chronic active hepatitis. Risks 
 
 Slight risks from having blood drawn include: Excessive bleeding Fainting  or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Liver disease test panel - autoimmune Images 
 
 
 Liver 
 References 
 
 Angulo P, Lindor KD. Primary biliary cirrhosis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 89. Czaia AJ. Autoimmune hepatitis. In: In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 88. Pawlotsky JM, Mchutchinson J. Chronic viral and autoimmune hepatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 151. Read More 
 
 Albumin - blood (serum) test 
 Antibody 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver disease 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 
 Review Date 1/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Eisner, MD, Private practice specializing in Gastroenterology, and Affiliate Assistant Professor, Florida Atlantic University School of Medicine, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia