
 Autoimmune disorders 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An autoimmune disorder occurs when  the body's immune system  attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake. There are more than 80 types of autoimmune disorders. Causes 
 
 The blood cells in the body's immune system help protect against harmful substances. Examples include bacteria, viruses,  toxins ,  cancer  cells, and blood and tissue from outside the body. These substances contain antigens. The immune system produces  antibodies  against these antigens that enable it to destroy these harmful substances. When you have an autoimmune disorder, your immune system does not distinguish between healthy tissue and antigens. As a result, the body sets off a reaction that destroys normal tissues.  The exact cause of autoimmune disorders is unknown. One theory is that some microorganisms (such as bacteria or viruses) or drugs may trigger changes that confuse the immune system. This may happen more often in people who have genes that make them more prone to autoimmune disorders. An autoimmune disorder may result in: The destruction of body tissue Abnormal growth of an organ Changes in organ function  An autoimmune disorder may affect one or more organ or tissue types. Areas often affected by autoimmune disorders include: Blood vessels Connective tissues Endocrine  glands such as the thyroid or pancreas Joints Muscles Red blood cells Skin  A person may have more than one autoimmune disorder at the same time. Common autoimmune disorders include: Addison disease Celiac disease - sprue  (gluten-sensitive enteropathy) Dermatomyositis Graves disease Hashimoto thyroiditis Multiple sclerosis Myasthenia gravis Pernicious anemia Reactive arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Sjögren syndrome Systemic lupus erythematosus Type I diabetes Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms will vary based on the type and location of the faulty immune response. Common symptoms include: Fatigue Fever General ill-feeling  (malaise) Joint pain Rash Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. Signs depend on the type of disease. Tests that may be done to diagnose an autoimmune disorder include: Antinuclear antibody tests Autoantibody tests CBC Comprehensive metabolic panel C-reactive protein  (CRP) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) Urinalysis  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to: Reduce symptoms Control the autoimmune process Maintain the body's ability to fight disease  Treatments will depend on your disease and symptoms. Types of treatments include: Supplements to replace a substance that the body lacks, such as thyroid hormone, vitamin B12, or insulin, due to the autoimmune disease Blood transfusions if blood is affected Physical therapy to help with movement if the bones, joints, or muscles are affected  Many people take medicines to reduce the immune system's abnormal response. These are often called immunosuppressive medicines. Examples include corticosteroids (such as prednisone) and nonsteroid drugs such as azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, sirolimus, or tacrolimus. Targeted drugs called tumor necrosis factor (TFN) blockers can be used for some diseases.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the disease. Most autoimmune diseases are  chronic , but many can be controlled with treatment. Symptoms of autoimmune disorders can come and go. When symptoms get worse, it is called a flare-up. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the disease. Medicines used to suppress the immune system can cause severe side effects, such as higher risk of infections.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of an autoimmune disorder. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for most autoimmune disorders. Images 
 
 
 Graves disease 
 Hashimoto's disease (chronic thyroiditis) 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Synovial fluid 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Bylund DJ, Nakamura RM. Organ-specific autoimmune diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 53. Kono DH, Theofilopoulos AN. Autoimmunity. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 20.  Read More 
 
 Addison disease 
 Allergies - overview 
 Antibody 
 Antigen 
 Cancer 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Dermatomyositis 
 Endocrine glands 
 Graves disease 
 Immune response 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Reactive arthritis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Toxins 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia