
 B and T cell screen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A B and T cell screen is a laboratory test to determine the amount of T and B cells (lymphocytes) in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample is needed .  Blood could also be obtained by  capillary sample  (fingerstick, or heelstick in infants). After the blood is drawn it goes through a two-step process. First, the lymphocytes are separated from other blood parts. Once the cells are separated, identifiers are added to distinguish between T and B cells. The E-rosetting test identifies T cells and direct immunofluorescence is used to identify B cells. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell your health care provider if you have had any of the following, which might affect your T and B cell count: Chemotherapy HIV Radiation therapy Recent or current infection Steroid therapy Stress Surgery How the Test Will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of certain diseases that weaken the immune system. It may also be used to distinguish between cancerous and noncancerous disease, especially cancers that involve the blood and bone marrow. The test may also be used to determine how well treatment for certain conditions is working. Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal T and B cell counts suggest a possible disease. Further testing is needed to confirm a diagnosis. An increased T cell count may be due to: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Chronic lymphocytic leukemia Infectious mononucleosis Multiple myeloma Syphilis Toxoplasmosis Tuberculosis  An increased B cell count may be due to: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia DiGeorge syndrome Multiple myeloma Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia A decreased T cell count may be due to: Congenital T-cell deficiency disease, such as Nezelof syndrome, DiGeorge syndrome, or Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome Acquired T-cell deficiency states, such as HIV infection or HTLV-1 infection B cell proliferative disorders, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia or Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia  A decreased B cell count may be due to: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Congenital immunoglobulin deficiency disorders Acquired immunoglobulin deficiency disorders  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Direct immunofluorescence; E-rosetting; T and B lymphocyte assays; B and T lymphocyte assays References 
 
 Soff GA, Green DL, Gardner LB. Hematologic manifestations of systemic disease: cancer. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hoffman Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 157. Read More 
 
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
 Benign 
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
 Immune response 
 Mononucleosis 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 11/24/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Levy, MD, PhD, Infectious Diseases, Lutherville Personal Physicians, Lutherville, MD, Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Leukemia 
 Lymphoma 
 Multiple Myeloma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia