
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis is present when bacteria cause an infection of the stomach and intestines  Causes 
 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis can affect 1 person or a group of people who all ate the same food. It is commonly called food poisoning. It often occurs after eating at picnics, school cafeterias, large social gatherings, or restaurants. The germs may get into your food (called contamination) in many ways: Meat or poultry may come into contact with bacteria when the animal is processed. Water that is used during growing or shipping may contain animal or human waste. Improper food handling or preparation may occur in grocery stores, restaurants, or homes.  Food poisoning often occurs from eating or drinking: Food prepared by someone who did not wash their hands properly Food prepared using unclean cooking utensils, cutting boards, or other tools Dairy products or food containing mayonnaise (such as coleslaw or potato salad) that have been out of the refrigerator too long Frozen or refrigerated foods that are not stored at the proper temperature or are not reheated properly Raw fish or oysters Raw fruits or vegetables that have not been washed well Raw vegetable or fruit juices and dairy products (look for the word "pasteurized" to make sure the food is safe to eat or drink) Undercooked meats or eggs Water from a well or stream, or city or town water that has not been treated  Many different types of bacteria can cause bacterial gastroenteritis, including: Campylobacter jejuni E coli Salmonella Shigella Staphylococcus Yersinia  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the type of bacteria that caused the sickness. All types of food poisoning cause  diarrhea . Other symptoms include: Abdominal cramps Abdominal pain Bloody stools Loss of appetite Nausea  and vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you for signs of food poisoning. These may include pain in the stomach and signs your body does not have as much water and fluids as it should (dehydration). Lab tests may be done on the food or a stool sample to find out what germ is causing your symptoms. However, these tests do not always show the cause of the diarrhea. Tests may also be done to look for white blood cells in the stool. This is a sign of infection. Treatment 
 
 You will most likely recover from the most common types of bacterial gastroenteritis in a couple of days. The goal is to make you feel better and avoid dehydration. Drinking enough fluids and learning what to eat will help ease symptoms. You may need to: Manage the diarrhea Control nausea and vomiting Get plenty of rest  If you have diarrhea and are unable to drink or keep down fluids because of nausea or vomiting, you may need fluids through a vein (IV). Young children may be at extra risk of getting dehydrated.  If you take diuretics ("water pills"), talk to your provider. You may need to stop taking the diuretic while you have diarrhea. Never stop or change your medicines without first talking to your provider. Antibiotics are not prescribed very often for most common types of bacterial gastroenteritis. If diarrhea is very severe or you have a weakened immune system, antibiotics may be needed. You can buy medicines at the drugstore that can help stop or slow diarrhea.  Do not use these medicines without talking to your provider if you have bloody diarrhea, a fever, or the diarrhea is severe. Do not give these medicines to children.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people get better in a few days without treatment.  Certain rare types of  E coli  can cause severe  anemia , gastrointestinal bleeding or even kidney failure.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Blood or pus in your stools, or your stool is black Diarrhea with a fever above 101째F (38.33째C) or 100.4째F (38째C) in children Recently traveled to a foreign country and developed diarrhea Stomach pain that does not go away after a bowel movement Symptoms of dehydration (thirst, dizziness, lightheadedness)  Also call if: The diarrhea gets worse or does not get better in 2 days for an infant or child, or 5 days for adults A child over 3 months old has been vomiting for more than 12 hours; in younger babies, call as soon as vomiting or diarrhea begins  Prevention 
 
 Take precautions to prevent food poisoning. Alternative Names 
 
 Infectious diarrhea - bacterial gastroenteritis; Acute gastroenteritis; Gastroenteritis - bacterial Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Bhutta ZA. Acute gastroenteritis in children. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 340. Craig SA. Gastroenteritis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 94. Mody RK, Griffin PM. Foodborne disease. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 103. Schiller LR, Sellin JH. Diarrhea. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Campylobacter infection 
 Colitis 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Food poisoning 
 Salmonella enterocolitis 
 Shigellosis 
 Systemic 
 Toxins 
 Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diarrhea - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Diarrhea - what to ask your health care provider  - adult 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gastroenteritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia