
 Balanitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Balanitis is swelling of the foreskin and head of the penis. Causes 
 
 Balanitis is most often caused by poor hygiene in uncircumcised men. Other possible causes include: Diseases such as  reactive arthritis  and lichen sclerosis atrophicus Infection Harsh soaps Not rinsing soap off properly while bathing Uncontrolled diabetes Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Redness of foreskin or  penis Other rashes on the head of the penis Foul-smelling discharge Painful penis and foreskin Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may diagnose the problem with only an exam. However, you may need skin tests for viruses, fungi, or bacteria. A  skin biopsy  may also be needed. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the balanitis.  Antibiotic pills or creams are used to treat balanitis that is caused by bacteria.  Steroid creams may help balanitis that occurs with skin diseases.  Anti-fungal cream will be prescribed if it is due to a fungus. In severe cases, circumcision may be the best option. If you cannot pull back (retract) the foreskin to clean it, you may need to be circumcised. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most cases of balanitis can be controlled with medicated creams and good hygiene. Surgery is not needed most of the time. Possible Complications 
 
 Long-term inflammation or infection can: Scar and narrow the opening of the penis (meatal stricture) Make it difficult and painful to retract the foreskin to expose the tip of the penis (a condition called phimosis) Make it difficult to move the foreskin over the head of the penis (a condition called paraphimosis) Affect the blood supply to the tip of the penis Increase the risk of penile cancer When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Tell your provider if you have any signs of balanitis, including swelling of the foreskin or pain. Prevention 
 
 Good hygiene can prevent most cases of balanitis. When you bathe, pull back the foreskin to clean and dry the area under it. Alternative Names 
 
 Balanoposthitis Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Penis, with and without foreskin 
 References 
 
 Elder JS. Anomalies of the penis and urethra. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 544. Jordan GH, McCammon KA. Surgery of the penis and urethra. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Link RE. Cutaneous diseases of the external genitalia. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Penis 
 Urethral stricture 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Penis Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia