
 Bartter syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bartter syndrome is a group of rare conditions that affect the kidneys. Causes 
 
 There are 5 gene defects known to be associated with Bartter syndrome. The condition is present at birth (congenital). The condition is caused by a defect in the kidneys' ability to reabsorb sodium. People affected by Bartter syndrome lose too much sodium through the urine. This causes a rise in the level of the hormone aldosterone, and makes the kidneys remove too much potassium from the body. This is known as potassium wasting.  The condition also results in an abnormal acid balance in the blood called hypokalemic alkalosis, which causes too much calcium in the urine. Symptoms 
 
 This disease usually occurs in childhood. Symptoms include: Constipation Rate of weight gain is much lower than that of other children of similar age and gender ( growth failure ) Needing to urinate more often than usual ( urinary frequency ) Low blood pressure Kidney stones 	Muscle cramping and weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 Bartter syndrome is usually suspected when a blood test finds a  low level of potassium in the blood . Unlike other forms of kidney disease, this condition does not cause high blood pressure. There is a tendency toward low blood pressure. Laboratory tests may show: High levels of  potassium , calcium, and  chloride in the urine High levels of the hormones  renin  and aldosterone in the blood Low blood chloride Metabolic  alkalosis These same signs and symptoms can also occur in people who take too many diuretics (water pills) or laxatives. Urine tests can be done to rule out other causes. An ultrasound of the kidneys may be done. Treatment 
 
 Bartter syndrome is treated by eating foods rich in potassium or taking potassium supplements. Many people also need salt and magnesium supplements. Medicine may be needed that blocks the kidney's ability to get rid of potassium. High doses of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may also be used. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Infants who have severe growth failure may grow normally with treatment. Over time, some people with the condition will develop  kidney failure . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child is: Having muscle cramps Not growing well Urinating frequently  Alternative Names 
 
 Potassium wasting; Salt-wasting nephropathy Images 
 
 
 Aldosterone level test 
 References 
 
 Bakkaloglu SA, Schaefer F. Diseases of the kidney and urinary tract in children. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 74. Guay-Woodford LM. Hereditary nephropathies and developmental abnormalities of the urinary tract. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 128. Read More 
 
 Aldosterone blood test 
 Alkalosis 
 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Walead Latif DO, nephrologist, Medical Director of Fresenius Vascular Care, and Clinical Assistant Professor of Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia