
 Basal ganglia dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Basal ganglia dysfunction is a problem with the deep brain structures that help start and control movement. Causes 
 
 Watch this video about: Athetosis resulting from basal ganglia injury Conditions that cause injury to the brain can damage the basal ganglia. Such conditions include: Carbon monoxide poisoning Drug overdose Head injury Infection Liver disease Metabolic  problems Multiple sclerosis  (MS) Poisoning with copper, manganese, or other heavy metals Stroke Tumors  A common cause of these findings is chronic use of medicines used to treat schizophrenia. Many brain disorders are associated with basal ganglia dysfunction. They include: Dystonia  (muscle tone problems) Huntington disease  (disorder in which nerve cells in certain parts of the brain waste away, or degenerate) Multiple system atrophy  (widespread nervous system disorder) Parkinson disease Progressive supranuclear palsy  (movement disorder from damage to certain nerve cells in the brain) Wilson disease  (disorder causing too much copper in the body's tissues)  Symptoms 
 
 Damage to the basal ganglia cells may cause problems controlling speech, movement, and posture. This combination of symptoms is called parkinsonism.  A person with basal ganglia dysfunction may have difficulty starting, stopping, or sustaining movement. Depending on which area of the brain is affected, there may also be problems with memory and other thought processes. In general, symptoms vary and may include: Movement changes, such as involuntary or slowed movements Increased muscle tone Muscle spasms and muscle rigidity Problems finding words Tremor Uncontrollable, repeated movements, speech, or cries (tics) Walking difficulty Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms and medical history. Blood and imaging tests may be needed. These may include: CT and MRI of the head Genetic testing Magnetic resonance angiography to look at the blood vessels in the neck and brain Positron emission tomography (PET) to look at the metabolism of the brain Blood tests to check blood sugar, thyroid function, liver function, and iron and copper levels  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the cause of the dysfunction. Some causes are reversible, while others require lifelong treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have any abnormal or involuntary movements, falls without known reason, or if you or others notice that you are shaky or slow. Alternative Names 
 
 Extrapyramidal syndrome; Antipsychotics - extrapyramidal References 
 
 Jankovic J. Parkinson disease and other movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 96. Lang AE. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 410. Melnick ME. Basal ganglia disorders. In: Umphred DA, Burton GU, Lazaro RT, Roller ML, eds.  Umphred's Neurological Renabilitation . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 20. Read More 
 
 Huntington disease 
 Movement - uncontrolled or slow 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Multiple system atrophy 
 Parkinson disease 
 Progressive supranuclear palsy 
 Wilson disease 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia