
 Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome is a rare disease passed down through families. The person is unable to fully absorb dietary fats through the intestines. Causes 
 
 Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome is caused by a defect in a gene that tells the body to create lipoproteins (molecules of fat combined with  protein ). The defect makes it hard for the body to properly digest fat and essential vitamins. It is an  autosomal recessive  condition that more often affects males. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Balance and coordination difficulties Curvature of spine Decreased vision that gets worse over time Developmental delay Failure to thrive (grow) in infancy Muscle weakness Poor muscle coordination that usually develops after age 10 Protruding abdomen Slurred speech Stool abnormalities, including fatty stools that appear pale in color, frothy stools, and abnormally foul-smelling stools Exams and Tests 
 
 There may be damage to the retina of the eye ( retinitis pigmentosa ). Tests that may be done to help diagnose this condition include: Apolipoprotein B  blood test Blood tests to look for vitamin deficiencies (fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K) "Burr-cell" malformation of the red cells (acanthocytosis) Complete blood count  (CBC) Cholesterol studies Electromyography Eye exam Nerve conduction velocity Stool sample analysis  Genetic testing may be available for mutations in the  MTP  gene. Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves large doses of vitamin supplements containing fat-soluble vitamins ( vitamin A ,  vitamin D ,  vitamin E , and  vitamin K ). Linoleic acid supplements are also recommended. People with this condition should talk to a nutritionist. Diet changes are needed to prevent stomach problems. This involves: Limiting fat intake to 5 to 20 grams per day. Do not eat more than 5 ounces daily (140 grams) of lean meat, fish, or poultry. Use skim milk instead of whole milk.  Supplements of medium-chain triglycerides are taken under the supervision of a health care provider. They should be used with caution, because they may cause liver damage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of brain and nervous system problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blindness Mental deterioration Loss of function of peripheral nerves, uncoordinated movement (ataxia) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your infant or child has symptoms of this disease. Genetic counseling can help families understand the condition and the risks of inheriting it, and learn how to care for the person. Prevention 
 
 High doses of fat-soluble vitamins may slow the progression of some problems, such as retina damage and decreased vision. Alternative Names 
 
 Abetalipoproteinemia; Acanthocytosis; Apolipoprotein B deficiency References 
 
 Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF. Defects in the metabolism of lipids. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 86. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Failure to thrive 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Protein in diet 
 VLDL test 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lipid Metabolism Disorders 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia