
 Bee poison 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bee poisoning is caused by a sting from a bee,  wasp , or yellow jacket. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poisoning from a sting. If you or someone you are with is stung, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Bee, wasp, and yellow jacket stings contain a substance called venom. Africanized bee colonies are very sensitive to being disturbed. When they are disturbed, they respond faster and in greater numbers than other types of bees. They are also much more likely to sting than European bees. Where Found 
 
 Bee, wasp, and yellow jacket venom can cause an allergic reaction in some people. Symptoms 
 
 A reaction to a sting may include these symptoms in different parts of the body: Eyes, ears, nose, and throat: Swelling  in the throat, lips, and mouth *  Gastrointestinal Abdominal cramping Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting  Heart and blood vessels Severe decrease in blood pressure Collapse *  Lungs: Difficulty breathing  *  Skin Hives * Itching Swelling and pain at site of the sting  * These symptoms are due to an  allergic reaction , and not venom. Home Care 
 
 If you have an  allergy  to bee, wasp, or yellow jacket stings, always carry a  bee sting  kit and know how to use it. These kits require a prescription. They contain a medicine called epinephrine, which you should take right away if you get a bee sting. Call poison control or a hospital emergency room if the person who is stung has an allergy to the insect or was stung inside the mouth or throat. People with severe reactions may need to go to the hospital. To treat the bee sting: Try to remove the stinger from the skin (if it is still present). To do this, carefully scrape the back of a knife or other thin, blunt, straight-edged object (like a credit card) across the stinger if the person can keep still and it is safe to do so. Or, you can pull out the stinger with tweezers or your fingers. If you do this, do not pinch the venom sac at the end of the stinger. If this sac is broken, more venom will be released. Clean the area thoroughly with soap and water. Place ice (wrapped in a clean cloth) on the site of the sting for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has problems with blood circulation, decrease the time that the ice is on the area to prevent possible skin damage. Give the person diphenhydramine (Benadryl and other brands) by mouth if they can swallow. This antihistamine drug may be used alone for mild symptoms.  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Type of insect, if possible Time of the sting  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on how allergic they are to the insect sting and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster they get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. The chances of future total body reactions increase when local reactions become more and more severe. People who are not allergic to bees or wasps usually get better within 1 week. Alternative Names 
 
 Apitoxin poisoning; Apis venenum purum poisoning; Apis virus poisoning Images 
 
 
 Insect stings and allergy 
 References 
 
 Erickson, TB, Márquez A, Jr. Arthropod envenomation and parasitism. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 50. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. Varney SM. Bites and stings. In: Markovchick VJ, Pons PT, Bakes KM, eds.  Emergency Medicine Secrets . 5th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 71. Read More 
 
 Wasp sting 
 
 Review Date 7/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washington. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Insect Bites and Stings 
 Browse the Encyclopedia