
 Bile culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bile culture is a laboratory test to detect disease-causing germs in the biliary system.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of  bile  is needed. This can be done using different methods, including  gallbladder surgery  or a procedure called endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography ( ERCP ). The bile sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish called a culture medium to see if bacteria, viruses, or fungi grow on the sample. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Preparation depends on the specific method used to obtain the bile sample. Follow your health care provider's instructions exactly. How the Test will Feel 
 
 If bile is taken during gallbladder surgery, you will feel no pain because you are asleep. If bile is taken during ERCP, you will receive medicine to relax you. You may have some discomfort as the  endoscope  passes through your mouth, throat, and down the esophagus. This feeling will go away shortly. You may also be given medicine (anesthesia) so that you will sleep lightly for this test. If you are asleep, you will not feel any discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to detect infection within the  biliary system . The biliary system creates, moves, stores, and releases bile to help in digestion. Normal Results 
 
 The test result is normal if no bacteria, virus, or fungus grew in the laboratory dish. Note:  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means bacteria, fungus, or a virus grew in the laboratory dish. This may be a sign of infection. Risks 
 
 Risks depend on the method used to take a sample of the bile. Your health care provider can explain these risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - bile Images 
 
 
 Bile culture 
 References 
 
 Hall GS, Woods GL. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 57. Kim AY, Chung RT. Bacterial, parasitic, and fungal infections of the liver, including liver abscess. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 84.  
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia