
 Bile duct obstruction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bile duct obstruction is a blockage in the tubes that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine. Causes 
 
 Bile  is a liquid released by the liver. It contains cholesterol, bile salts, and waste products such as  bilirubin . Bile salts help your body break down (digest) fats. Bile passes out of the liver through the bile ducts and is stored in the gallbladder. After a meal, it is released into the small intestine. When the bile ducts become blocked, bile builds up in the liver, and jaundice (yellow color of the skin) develops due to the increasing level of bilirubin in the blood. The possible causes of a blocked bile duct include: Cysts of the common bile duct Enlarged lymph nodes in the porta hepatis Gallstones Inflammation of the bile ducts Narrowing of the bile ducts from scarring Injury from gallbladder surgery Tumors of the bile ducts or pancreas Tumors that have spread to the  biliary system Liver and bile duct worms (flukes) The risk factors include: History of gallstones,  chronic pancreatitis , or  pancreatic cancer Injury to the abdominal area Recent  biliary surgery Recent biliary cancer (such as  bile duct cancer )  The blockage can also be caused by infections. This is more common in people with weakened immune systems. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain  in the upper right side Dark urine Fever Itching Jaundice (yellow skin color) Nausea and vomiting Pale-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and feel your belly.  The following blood test results could be due to a possible blockage: Increased bilirubin level Increased alkaline phosphatase level Increased liver enzymes  The following tests may be used to investigate a possible blocked bile duct: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram  (PTCA) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)  A blocked bile duct may also alter the results of the following tests:  Amylase blood test Gallbladder radionuclide scan Lipase blood test Prothrombin time (PT) Urine bilirubin Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve the blockage. Stones may be removed using an endoscope during an ERCP. In some cases, surgery is required to bypass the blockage. The gallbladder will usually be surgically removed if the blockage is caused by gallstones. Your provider may prescribe antibiotics if an infection is suspected. If the blockage is caused by cancer, the duct may need to be widened. This procedure is called endoscopic or percutaneous (through the skin next to the liver) dilation. A tube may need to be placed to allow drainage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the blockage is not corrected, it can lead to life-threatening infection and a dangerous buildup of bilirubin. If the blockage lasts a long time, chronic  liver disease  can result. Most obstructions can be treated with endoscopy or surgery. Obstructions caused by cancer often have a worse outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Left untreated, the possible complications include infections,  sepsis , and liver disease, such as biliary  cirrhosis . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice a change in the color of your urine and stools or you develop jaundice. Prevention 
 
 Be aware of any risk factors you have, so that you can get prompt diagnosis and treatment if a bile duct becomes blocked. The blockage itself may not be preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Biliary obstruction Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Bile pathway 
 Biliary obstruction - series 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Perman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine.  22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 23. Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and bile ducts. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Biliary system 
 Bilirubin blood test 
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Gallbladder removal - open 
 Gallstones 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia