
 Biofeedback 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Biofeedback is a technique that measures bodily functions and gives you information about them in order to help train you to control them. Information 
 
 Biofeedback is most often based on measurements of: Blood pressure Brain waves ( EEG ) Breathing Heart rate Muscle tension Skin conductivity of electricity Skin temperature  By watching these measurements, you can learn how to change these functions by relaxing or by holding pleasant images in your mind. Patches, called electrodes, are placed on different parts of your body. They measure your heart rate, blood pressure, or other function. A monitor displays the results. A tone or other sound may be used to let you know when you have reached a goal or certain state. Your health care provider will describe a situation and guide you through relaxation techniques. The monitor lets you see how your heart rate and blood pressure change in response to being stressed or remaining relaxed. Biofeedback teaches you how to control and change these bodily functions. By doing so, you feel more relaxed or more able to cause specific muscle relaxation processes. This may help treat conditions such as: Anxiety and insomnia Constipation Tension and  migraine headaches Urinary incontinence Images 
 
 
 Biofeedback 
 Biofeedback 
 Acupuncture 
 References 
 
 Haas DJ. Complementary and alternative medicine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 131. Perlman A. Complementary and alternative medicine. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 39. Turk DC. Psychological interventions. In: Benzon HT, Rathmell JP, Wu CL, Turk DC, Argoff CE, Hurley RW, eds.  Practical Management of Pain . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Pulse 
 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia