
 Biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A biopsy is the removal of a small piece of tissue for laboratory examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 There are several different types of biopsies. A needle biopsy is called a percutaneous biopsy. It removes tissue using a needle attached to a hollow tube called a syringe. The needle is passed several times through the tissue being examined. The doctor uses the needle to remove the tissue sample. Needle biopsies are often done using  CT scan  or  ultrasound . These imaging tools help guide the doctor to the right area. An open biopsy is surgery that uses local or general anesthesia. This means you are relaxed (sedated) or asleep and pain-free during the procedure. It is done in a hospital operating room. The surgeon makes a cut into the affected area, and the tissue is removed. A laparoscopic biopsy uses much smaller surgical cuts than open biopsy. A camera-like instrument (laparoscope) and tools can be inserted. The laparoscope helps guide the surgeon to the right place to take the sample. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Before scheduling the biopsy, tell your health care provider about any medicines you are taking, including herbs and supplements. You may be asked to stop taking some for a while, particularly those that can make you bleed. Such medicines include aspirin, warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix), and NSAIDs. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without first talking to your provider. How the Test will Feel 
 
 In a needle biopsy, you may feel a small sharp pinch at the site of the biopsy. Local anesthesia is injected to lessen the pain. In an open or laparoscopic biopsy, general anesthesia is often used so that you will be pain-free. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A biopsy is most often done to examine tissue for disease.  Normal Results 
 
 The tissue removed is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal biopsy means that the tissue or cells have an unusual structure, shape, size, or condition. This may mean you have a disease, such as cancer, but it depends on your biopsy. Risks  
 
 Risks of a biopsy include: Bleeding Infection  Considerations 
 
 There are many different types of biopsies, such as: Abdominal wall fat pad biopsy Biopsy of the biliary tract Bladder biopsy Bone lesion biopsy Bone marrow biopsy Breast biopsy Carpal tunnel biopsy Chorionic villus biopsy Cold cone biopsy Colposcopy-directed biopsy Endometrial biopsy Gum biopsy Kidney biopsy Liver biopsy Lung biopsy Lymph node biopsy Mediastinoscopy with biopsy Muscle biopsy Myocardial biopsy Nasal mucosal biopsy Nerve biopsy Open lung biopsy Open pleural biopsy Oropharynx lesion biopsy Pleural needle biopsy Polyp biopsy Rectal biopsy Renal biopsy Salivary gland biopsy Skin lesion biopsy Skinny-needle biopsy Synovial biopsy Testicular biopsy Thyroid biopsy Tongue biopsy Upper airway biopsy Ureteral retrograde brush biopsy cytology Alternative Names 
 
 Tissue sampling References 
 
 American College of Radiology (ACR), the Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR), and the Society for Pediatric Radiology. ACR-SIR-SPR practice parameter for the performance of image-guided percutaneous needle biopsy (PNB). Amended 2014 (Resolution 39).  www.acr.org/~/media/1D9E3F3270CF44F8A2E994C94F2F0FAC.pdf . Accessed October 31, 2016. Desai SB, Lewandowski RJ, Nemcek AA. Percutaneous biopsy. In: Mauro MA, Murphy KPJ, Thomson KR, Venbrux AC, Morgan RA, eds.  Image-Guided Interventions . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 126. 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia