
 Bleeding time 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bleeding time is a medical test that measures how fast small blood vessels in the skin stop bleeding. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood pressure cuff is inflated around your upper arm. While the cuff is on your arm, the health care provider makes two small cuts on the lower arm. They are just deep enough to cause a tiny amount of bleeding. The blood pressure cuff is immediately deflated. Blotting paper is touched to the cuts every 30 seconds until the bleeding stops. The provider records the time it takes for the cuts to stop bleeding. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Certain medicines can change blood test results. Tell your health care provider about all the medicines you take. Your provider will tell you if you need to temporarily stop taking any medicines before you have this test. This may include dextran and aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).  Do not stop or change your medicines without talking to your doctor first. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The tiny cuts are very shallow. Most people say it feels like a skin scratch. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test helps diagnose bleeding problems. Normal Results 
 
 Bleeding normally stops within 1 to 9 minutes. However, values may vary from lab to lab.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Longer-than-normal bleeding time may be due to: Blood vessel defect Platelet aggregation defect Thrombocytopenia  (low platelet count) Risks 
 
 There is a very slight risk of infection where the skin is cut. Images 
 
 
 Blood clot test 
 References 
 
 Schafer A. Approach to the patient with bleeding and thrombosis In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 174. Schmaier AH. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 131. Read More 
 
 Acquired platelet function defect 
 Congenital platelet function defects 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 Von Willebrand disease 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia