
 Bleeding esophageal varices 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The esophagus is the tube that connects your throat to your stomach. Varices are enlarged veins that may be found in the esophagus. These veins may break open and bleed. Causes 
 
 Scarring ( cirrhosis ) of the liver is the most common cause of esophageal varices. This scarring cuts down on blood flowing through the liver. As a result, more blood flows through the veins of the esophagus. The extra blood flow causes the veins in the esophagus to balloon outward. Heavy bleeding can occur if the veins break open. Any type of chronic liver disease can cause esophageal varices. Varices can also occur in the upper part of the stomach. Symptoms 
 
 People with chronic liver disease and esophageal varices may have no symptoms. If there is only a small amount of bleeding, the only symptom may be dark or black streaks in the stools. If larger amounts of bleeding occur, symptoms may include: Black, tarry stools Bloody stools Lightheadedness Paleness Symptoms of chronic liver disease  Vomiting Vomiting blood Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam which may show: Bloody or black stool (in a rectal exam) Low blood pressure Rapid heart rate Signs of chronic liver disease or cirrhosis  Tests to find the source of the bleeding and determine if there is active bleeding include: EGD  or upper endoscopy, which involves the use of a camera on a flexible tube to examine the esophagus and stomach. Insertion of a tube through the nose into the stomach (nasogastric tube) to look for signs of bleeding. Some providers recommend EGD for people who are newly diagnosed with mild to moderate cirrhosis. This test screens for esophageal varices and treats them before there is bleeding. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to stop  acute  bleeding as soon as possible. Bleeding must be controlled quickly to prevent  shock  and death.  If massive bleeding occurs, a person may need to be put on a ventilator to protect the airways and prevent blood from going down into the lungs. To stop the bleeding: The provider may pass an  endoscope  (tube with a small light at the end) into the esophagus: A clotting medicine may be injected into the varices. A rubber band may be placed around the bleeding veins (called banding). Other treatments to stop the bleeding: A medicine that  tightens blood vessels  may be given through an IV. Examples include octreotide or  vasopressin . Rarely, a tube may be inserted through the nose into the stomach and inflated with air. This produces pressure against the bleeding veins (balloon tamponade). Once the bleeding is stopped, other varices can be treated with medicines and medical procedures to prevent future bleeding, including: Drugs called beta blockers, such as propranolol and nadolol that reduce the risk of bleeding. A rubber band can be placed around the bleeding veins during an EGD procedure. Also, some medicines can be injected into the varices during EGD to cause them to clot. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt ( TIPS ). This is a procedure to create new connections between 2 blood vessels in your liver. This can decrease pressure in the veins and prevent bleeding episodes from happening again. Emergency surgery may be used (rarely) to treat people if other therapy fails. Portocaval shunts or surgery to remove the esophagus are 2 treatment options, but these procedures are risky. People with bleeding varices from liver disease may need more treatment for their liver disease, including a liver transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Bleeding often comes back with or without treatment. Bleeding esophageal varices are a serious complication of liver disease and have a poor outcome. Placement of a shunt can result in a decrease of blood supply to the brain, leading to mental status changes. Possible Complications 
 
 Future problems caused by varices may include: Narrowing or  stricture of the esophagus  due to scarring after a procedure Return of bleeding after treatment When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider or go to an emergency room if you vomit blood or have black tarry stools. Prevention 
 
 Treating the causes of liver disease may prevent bleeding. Liver transplantation should be considered for some people. Alternative Names 
 
 Liver cirrhosis - varices; Cryptogenic chronic liver disease - varices; End-stage liver disease - varices; Alcoholic liver disease - varices Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Liver blood supply 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Savides TJ, Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal bleeding. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 20. Read More 
 
 Bloody or tarry stools 
 Esophageal stricture - benign 
 Hypovolemic shock 
 Liver disease 
 Shock 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia