
 Blindness and vision loss 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blindness is a lack of vision. It may also refer to a loss of vision that cannot be corrected with glasses or contact lenses. Partial blindness means you have very limited vision. Complete blindness means you cannot see anything and DO NOT see light. (Most people who use the term "blindness" mean complete blindness.)  People with vision that is worse than 20/200 with glasses or contact lenses are considered legally blind in most states in the United States. Vision loss refers to the partial or complete loss of vision. This vision loss may happen suddenly or over a period of time. Some types of vision loss never lead to complete blindness. Causes 
 
 Blindness has many causes. In the United States, the leading causes are: Accidents or injuries to the surface of the eye ( chemical burns  or sports injuries) Diabetes Glaucoma Macular degeneration The type of partial vision loss may differ, depending on the cause: With  cataracts , vision may be cloudy or fuzzy, and bright light may cause glare With diabetes, vision may be blurred, there may be shadows or missing areas of vision, and difficulty seeing at night With glaucoma, there may be tunnel vision and missing areas of vision With macular degeneration, the side vision is normal but the central vision is slowly lost Other causes of vision loss include: Blocked blood vessels Complications of premature birth ( retrolental fibroplasia ) Complications of eye surgery Lazy eye Optic neuritis Stroke Retinitis pigmentosa Tumors, such as  retinoblastoma  and  optic glioma Home Care 
 
 When you have low vision, you may have trouble driving, reading, or doing small tasks such as sewing or making crafts. You can make  changes in your home and routines  that help you stay safe and independent. Many services will provide you with the training and support you need to live independently. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Sudden vision loss is always an emergency, even if you have not completely lost vision. You should never ignore vision loss, thinking it will get better. Contact an ophthalmologist or go to the emergency room immediately. Most serious forms of vision loss are painless, and the absence of pain in no way diminishes the urgent need to get medical care. Many forms of vision loss only give you a short amount of time to be successfully treated. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will do a complete eye exam. The treatment will depend on the cause of the vision loss. For long-term vision loss, see a low-vision specialist, who can help you learn to care for yourself and live a full life. Alternative Names 
 
 Loss of vision; No light perception (NLP); Low vision; Vision loss and blindness Images 
 
 
 Neurofibromatosis I, enlarged optic foramen 
 References 
 
 Kraut JA. Vision rehabilitation. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 edition . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 1, chap 46. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl, ED, Ariss MM, Lindquist TP. Disorders of vision. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 621. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, Ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vision Impairment and Blindness 
 Browse the Encyclopedia