
 Blood clots 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blood clots are clumps that occur when blood hardens from a liquid to a solid.  A blood clot that forms inside one of your veins or arteries is called a thrombus. A thrombus may also form in your heart.  A thrombus that breaks loose and travels from one location in the body to another is called an  embolus . A thrombus or embolus can partly or completely block the flow of blood in a blood vessel. A blockage in an artery may prevent oxygen from reaching the tissues in that area. This is called ischemia. If ischemia is not treated promptly, it can lead to tissue damage or death. A blockage in the vein will often cause fluid buildup and swelling.  Causes 
 
 Situations in which a blood clot is more likely to form in veins include: Being on long-term bed rest Crossing your legs for long periods when sitting, or sitting for long periods, such as in a plane or car During and after pregnancy Taking birth control pills or estrogen hormones (especially in women who smoke) Long-term use of an intravenous catheter  After surgery Blood clots are also more likely to form after an injury. People with cancer, obesity, and liver or kidney disease are also prone to blood clots. A buildup of cholesterol that narrows an artery may change or slow the flow of blood, making it easier for a blood clot or thrombus to form. Conditions that are passed down through families (inherited) may make you more likely to form abnormal blood clots. Inherited conditions that affect clotting are: Factor V Leiden thrombophilia Prothrombin G20210A mutation Other rare conditions, such as  protein C, protein S , and  antithrombin III deficiencies A blood clot may block an artery or vein in the heart, affecting the: Heart (angina or a heart attack) Intestines ( mesenteric ischemia  or  mesenteric venous thrombosis ) Kidneys ( renal vein thrombosis ) Leg or arm arteries Legs ( deep vein thrombosis ) Lungs ( pulmonary embolism ) Neck or brain (stroke)  Alternative Names 
 
 Clot; Emboli; Thrombi; Hypercoagulable state Images 
 
 
 Thrombus 
 Janeway lesion on the finger 
 Deep venous thrombosis, iliofemoral 
 References 
 
 Schafer AI. Thrombotic disorders: hypercoagulable states. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 176. Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Arterial embolism 
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Heart attack 
 Limb plethysmography 
 Necrosis 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Stroke 
 Thrombophlebitis 
 Venogram 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Deep vein thrombosis - discharge 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) - what to ask your doctor 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin) 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Clots 
 Browse the Encyclopedia