
 Blood in the semen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blood in the semen is called hematospermia. It may be in amounts too small to be seen except with a microscope, or it may be visible in the ejaculation fluid. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, blood in the semen is caused by  swelling or infection of the prostate  or seminal vesicles. The problem may occur after a  prostate biopsy . Blood in the semen may also be caused by: Blockage due to enlarged prostate (prostate problems) Infection of the prostate Irritation in the urethra (urethritis) Injury to the urethra  Often, the cause of the problem cannot be found. Sometimes, the visible blood will last several days to weeks, depending on the cause of the blood and if any clots formed in the seminal vesicles. 
  Depending on the cause, other symptoms that may occur include: Blood in the urine Fever or chills Lower back pain Pain with bowel movement Pain with ejaculation Pain with urination Swelling in the scrotum Swelling or tenderness in the groin area Tenderness in the scrotum  Home Care 
 
 The following steps may help ease discomfort from a  prostate infection  or urinary infection: Take over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen or naproxen. Drink plenty of fluids. Eat high-fiber foods to make bowel movements easier. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Always call your health care provider if you notice any blood in your semen. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and look for signs of: Discharge from the urethra Enlarged or tender prostate Fever Swollen lymph nodes Swollen or tender scrotum You may need the following tests: Prostate exam PSA blood test Semen analysis Semen culture Ultrasound of the prostate, pelvis or scrotum Urinalysis Urine culture Alternative Names 
 
 Semen - bloody; Blood in ejaculation Images 
 
 
 Blood in semen 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Kaplan SA. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 129. Small EJ. Prostate cancer. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 201. Read More 
 
 Fever 
 Scrotum 
 Urination - painful 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia