
 Bone x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bone  x-ray  is an imaging test to look at the bones. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in the health care provider's office by an x-ray technician. For the test, you will position the bone to be x-rayed on the table. Pictures are then taken, and the bone is repositioned for different views. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the health care provider if you are pregnant. You must remove all jewelry for the x-ray. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-rays are painless. Changing position for getting different views of the bone may be uncomfortable. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A bone x-ray is used to look for injuries or  conditions affecting the bone. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal findings include: Fractures or broken bone Bone tumors Degenerative bone conditions Osteomyelitis  (inflammation of the bone caused by an infection) Additional conditions under which the test may be performed: Cystic fibrosis Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II Multiple myeloma Osgood-Schlatter disease Osteogenesis imperfecta Osteomalacia Paget's disease Primary hyperparathyroidism Rickets Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-ray machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - bone Images 
 
 
 Skeleton 
 Skeletal spine 
 Osteogenic sarcoma - x-ray 
 References 
 
 Mettler, FA. Skeletal system. In: Mettler FA, ed.  Essentials of Radiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 8. Read More 
 
 Bone tumor 
 Broken bone 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Osgood-Schlatter disease 
 Osteogenesis imperfecta 
 Osteomalacia 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Paget disease of the bone 
 Rickets 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Cancer 
 Bone Diseases 
 Bone Infections 
 Fractures 
 Osteoarthritis 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia