
 Boric acid poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Boric acid is a dangerous poison. Poisoning from this chemical can be acute or chronic. Acute boric acid poisoning usually occurs when someone swallows powdered roach-killing products that contain the chemical. Chronic poisoning occurs in those who are repeatedly exposed to boric acid. For example, in the past, boric acid was used to disinfect and treat wounds. People who received such treatment over and over again got sick, and some died. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Boric acid Where Found 
 
 Boric acid is found in: Antiseptics and astringents Enamels and glazes Glass fiber manufacturing Medicated powders Skin lotions Some paints Some rodent and ant pesticides Photography chemicals Powders to kill roaches Some eye wash products  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptoms of boric acid poisoning are blue-green vomit, diarrhea, and a bright red rash on the skin. Other symptoms may include: Blisters Collapse Coma Convulsions Drowsiness Fever Lack of desire to do anything Low blood pressure Significantly  decreased urine output  (or none) Sloughing of skin Twitching of facial muscles , arms, hands, legs, and feet Home Care 
 
 If the chemical is on the skin, remove it by washing the area thoroughly. If the chemical was swallowed, seek medical treatment immediately. If the chemical contacted the eyes, wash them out with cool water for 15 minutes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Treatment depends on the individual symptoms. The person may receive: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Camera down the throat (endoscopy) to see burns in the esophagus and stomach Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms  Note: Activated charcoal does not effectively treat (absorb) boric acid. For skin exposure, treatment may include: Surgical removal of burned skin (debridement) Transfer to a hospital that specializes in burn care Washing of the skin (irrigation), possibly every few hours for several days  The person may need to be admitted to a hospital for more treatment. Surgery may be needed if the esophagus, stomach, or intestine has a hole (perforation) from the acid. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The infant death rate from boric acid poisonings is high. However, boric acid poisoning is considerably rarer than in the past because the substance is no longer used as a disinfectant in nurseries. It is also no longer commonly used in medical preparations. Boric acid is an ingredient in some vaginal suppositories used for yeast infections, although this is NOT a standard treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Borax poisoning References 
 
 Cain WS. Sensory and associated reactions to mineral dusts: sodium borate, calcium oxide, and calcium sulfate.  J Occup Environ Hyg . April 2004;1(4):222-36.  Goldfrank LR. Ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2006. Matsuda K. Toxicological analyses over the past five years at a single institution.  Rinsho Byori . Oct. 2004;52(10):819-23.  Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 1/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia