
 Botulism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Botulism is a rare but serious illness caused by  Clostridium botulinum  bacteria. The bacteria may enter the body through wounds, or by eating them from improperly canned or preserved food. Causes 
 
 Clostridium botulinum  is found in soil and untreated water throughout the world. It produces  spores  that survive in improperly preserved or canned food, where they produce a toxin. When eaten, even tiny amounts of this toxin can lead to severe poisoning. Foods that can be contaminated are home-canned vegetables, cured pork and ham, smoked or raw fish, and honey or corn syrup, baked potatoes cooked in foil, carrot juice, and chopped garlic in oil. Infant botulism  occurs when a baby eats spores and the bacteria grow in the baby's gastrointestinal tract. The most common cause of infant botulism is eating honey or corn syrup, or using pacifiers that have been coated with contaminated honey. Clostridium botulinum  can be found normally in the stool of some infants. Infants develop botulism when the bacteria grow in their gut. Botulism may also occur if the bacteria enter open wounds and produce toxins there. About 110 cases of botulism occur in the United States each year. Most of the cases are in infants. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms often appear 8 to 36 hours after you eat food contaminated with the toxin. There is NO fever with this infection. In adults, symptoms may include: Abdominal cramps Breathing difficulty  that may lead to respiratory failure Difficulty swallowing and speaking Double vision Nausea Vomiting Weakness with paralysis (equal on both sides of the body) Symptoms in infants may include: Constipation Drooling Poor feeding and weak sucking Respiratory distress Weak cry Weakness, loss of muscle tone Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. There may be signs of: Absent or decreased deep tendon reflexes Absent or decreased gag reflex Eyelid drooping Loss of muscle function, starting at the top of the body and moving down Paralyzed bowel Speech impairment Urine retention with inability to urinate Blurred vision No fever  Blood tests can be done to identify the toxin. A  stool culture  may also be ordered. Lab tests can be done on the suspected food to confirm botulism. Treatment 
 
 You will need medicine to fight the toxin produced by the bacteria. The medicine is called botulinus antitoxin. You will have to stay in the hospital if you have breathing trouble. A tube may be inserted through the nose or mouth into the windpipe to provide an airway for oxygen. You may need a breathing machine. People who have trouble swallowing may be given fluids through a vein (by IV). A feeding tube may be inserted. Providers must tell state health authorities or the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention about people with botulism, so that the contaminated food can be removed from stores. Some people are given antibiotics, but they may not always help.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt treatment significantly reduces the risk of death. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from botulism include: Aspiration pneumonia  and infection Long-lasting weakness Nervous system problems for up to 1 year Respiratory distress When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you suspect botulism. Prevention 
 
 NEVER give honey or corn syrup to infants younger than 1 year old -- not even just a little taste on a pacifier. Prevent infant botulism by breastfeeding only, if possible. Always throw away bulging cans or foul-smelling preserved foods. Sterilizing home-canned foods by pressure cooking them at 250째F (121째C) for 30 minutes may reduce the risk for botulism. Visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website for more information on home canning safety ( www.cdc.gov/features/homecanning ). Keep foil-wrapped baked potatoes hot or in the refrigerator, not at room temperature. Oils with garlic or other herbs should also be refrigerated as should carrot juice. Make sure to set the refrigerator temperature at 50째F (10째C) or lower. Images 
 
 
 Bacteria 
 References 
 
 Arnon SS. Botulism ( Clostridium botulinum ). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 210. Hodowanec A, Bleck TP. Botulism ( Clostridium botulinum ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 247. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Respiratory 
 Spores 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Botulism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia