
 Brachial plexopathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brachial plexopathy is a form of peripheral neuropathy. It occurs when there is damage to the brachial plexus. This is an area on each side of the neck where nerve roots from the spinal cord split into each arm's nerves. Damage to these nerves results in pain, decreased movement, or decreased sensation in the arm and shoulder. Causes 
 
 Damage to the brachial plexus is usually from direct injury to the nerve, stretching injuries (including birth trauma), pressure from tumors in the area (especially from lung tumors), or damage that results from  radiation therapy . Brachial plexus dysfunction may also be associated with: Birth defects that put pressure on the neck area Exposure to toxins, chemicals, or drugs General anesthesia, used during surgery Inflammatory conditions, such as those due to a virus or immune system problem  In some cases, no cause can be identified. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Numbness  of the shoulder, arm, or hand Shoulder pain Tingling, burning, pain, or abnormal sensations (location depends on the area injured) Weakness  of the shoulder, arm, hand, or wrist  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam of the arm, hand and wrist can reveal a problem with the nerves of the brachial plexus. Signs may include: Deformity of the arm or hand Difficulty moving the shoulder, arm, hand, or fingers Diminished arm reflexes Wasting of the muscles Weakness of hand flexing A detailed history may help determine the cause of the brachial plexopathy. Age and sex are important, because some brachial plexus problems are more common in certain groups. For example, young men more often have inflammatory or post-viral brachial plexus disease called Parsonage-Turner syndrome. Tests that may be done to diagnose this condition may include: Blood tests Chest x-ray Electromyography ( EMG ) to check the muscles and nerves that control the muscles MRI of the head, neck, and shoulder Nerve conduction  to check how fast electrical signals move through a nerve Nerve biopsy  to examine a piece of nerve under the microscope (rarely needed) Ultrasound Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at correcting the underlying cause and allowing you to use your hand and arm as much as possible. In some cases, no treatment is needed and the problem gets better on its own. Treatment options include any of the following: Medicines to control pain Physical therapy to help maintain muscle strength. Braces, splints, or other devices to help you use your arm Nerve block, in which medicine is injected into the area near the nerves to reduce pain Surgery to repair the nerves or remove something pressing on the nerves  Occupational therapy or counseling to suggest changes in the workplace may be needed.  Medical conditions such as diabetes and kidney disease can damage nerves. In these cases, treatment is also directed at the underlying medical condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A good recovery is possible if the cause is identified and properly treated. In some cases, there is partial or complete loss of movement or sensation. Nerve pain may be severe and may last for a long time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity of the hand or arm, mild to severe, which can lead to  contractures Partial or complete arm  paralysis Partial or complete loss of sensation in the arm, hand, or fingers Recurrent or unnoticed injury to the hand or arm due to diminished sensation  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you experience pain, numbness, tingling, or weakness in the shoulder, arm, or hand. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - brachial plexus; Brachial plexus dysfunction; Parsonage-Turner syndrome; Pancoast syndrome Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Chad DA, Bowley MP. Disorders of nerve roots and plexuses. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 106. Waldman SD. Cervicothoracic interspinous bursitis. In: Waldman SD, ed.  Atlas of Uncommon Pain Syndromes . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 22. Read More 
 
 Brachial plexus 
 Contracture deformity 
 Muscle function loss 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Radiation therapy 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arm Injuries and Disorders 
 Brachial Plexus Injuries 
 Hand Injuries and Disorders 
 Shoulder Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia