
 Breast pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 





Breast pain is any discomfort or pain in the breast. 





 
 Considerations 
 
 There are many possible causes for breast pain. For example, hormone level changes from menstruation or pregnancy often cause breast tenderness. Some swelling and tenderness just before your period is normal. Some women who have pain in one or both breasts may fear  breast cancer . However, breast pain is not a common symptom of cancer. Causes 
 
 Some breast tenderness is normal. The discomfort may be caused by hormone changes from: Menopause (unless a woman is taking hormone replacement therapy) Menstruation and  premenstrual syndrome  (PMS) Pregnancy -- breast tenderness tends to be more common during the first trimester and in women who become pregnant at a young age Puberty in both girls and boys  Soon after having a baby, a woman's breasts may become swollen with milk. This can be very painful. If you also have an area of redness, call your health care provider.  Breastfeeding itself may also cause breast pain. Fibrocystic breast changes  are a common cause of breast pain. Fibrocystic breast tissue contains lumps or cysts that tend to be more tender just before your menstrual period. Certain medicines may also cause breast pain, including:  Oxymetholone Chlorpromazine Diuretics Digitalis preparations Methyldopa Spironolactone  Shingles  can lead to pain in the breast if the painful blistering rash appears on the skin of your breasts. Home Care 
 
 If you have painful breasts, the following may help: Take medicine such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen Use heat or ice on the breast Wear a well-fitting bra that supports your breasts  There is no good evidence to show that reducing the amount of fat, caffeine, or chocolate in your diet helps reduce breast pain. Vitamin E, thiamine, magnesium, and evening primrose oil are not harmful, but most studies have not shown any benefit. Talk to your health care provider before starting any medicine or supplement. Certain birth control pills may help ease breast pain. Ask your provider if this therapy is right for you. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Bloody or clear discharge from your nipple Given birth within the last week and your breasts are swollen or hard Noticed a new lump with pain that does not go away after your menstrual period Persistent, unexplained breast pain Signs of a breast infection, including redness, pus, or fever  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a breast examination and ask questions about your breast pain. You may have a  mammogram  or ultrasound. Your provider may schedule a follow-up visit if your symptoms have not gone away in a given period of time. You may be referred to a specialist.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - breast; Mastalgia; Mastodynia; Breast tenderness Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 Breast pain 
 References 
 
 Katz VL, Dotters D. Breast diseases: diagnosis and treatment of benign and malignant disease. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 15. Managing your: breast pain. In: Alvero R, Ferri FF, Fort GG, et al, eds.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015 . 1st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:section V. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 Breast enlargement in males 
 Premenstrual breast changes 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: John A. Daller, MD, PhD., Department of Surgery, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia