
 Breathing difficulties - first aid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Most people take breathing for granted. People with certain illnesses may have breathing problems that they deal with on a regular basis.  This article discusses first aid for someone who is having unexpected breathing problems. Breathing difficulties can range from:  Being short of breath Being unable to take a deep breath and gasping for air Feeling like you are not getting enough air  Considerations 
 
 Breathing difficulty is almost always a medical emergency. An exception is feeling slightly winded from normal activity, such as exercise. Causes 
 
 There are many different causes for breathing problems. Common causes include some health conditions and sudden medical emergencies. Some health conditions that may cause breathing problems are: Anemia (low red blood cell count) Asthma Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis 
  Heart disease or heart failure Lung cancer, or cancer that has spread to the lungs Respiratory infections, including  pneumonia , acute bronchitis,  whooping cough ,  croup , and others Pericardial effusion (fluid surrounding the heart and not allowing it to fill properly) Pleural effusion (fluid surrounding the lungs and compressing them)  Some medical emergencies that can cause breathing problems are: Being at a high altitude Blood clot in the lung Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) Heart attack Injury to the neck, chest wall, or lungs Life-threatening allergic reaction Near drowning, which causes fluid buildup in the lungs  Symptoms 
 
 A person who is having a hard time breathing difficulty will often look uncomfortable. They may be: Breathing rapidly Unable to breathe lying down and need to sit up to breathe Very anxious and agitated  Sleepy or  confused They might have other symptoms, including: Dizziness Pain Fever Cough Nausea Vomiting Bluish lips, fingers, and fingernails Chest moving in an unusual way Gurgling,  wheezing , or whistling sounds Muffled voice or difficulty speaking Coughing up blood Rapid or irregular heartbeat Sweating  If an allergy is causing the breathing problem, they might have a rash or swelling of the face, tongue, or throat.  If an injury is causing breathing difficulty, they might be bleeding or have a visible wound.  First Aid 
 
 If someone is having breathing difficulty, call 911 or your local emergency number right away, then: Check the person's airway, breathing, and pulse. If necessary, begin  CPR . Loosen any tight clothing. Help the person use any prescribed medicine (an asthma inhaler or home oxygen). Continue to monitor the person's breathing and pulse until medical help arrives. DO NOT assume that the person's condition is improving if you can no longer hear abnormal breath sounds, such as wheezing. If there are open wounds in the neck or chest, they must be closed immediately, especially if air bubbles appear in the wound. Bandage such wounds at once. A "sucking" chest wound allows air to enter the person's chest cavity with each breath. This can cause a  collapsed lung . Bandage the wound with plastic wrap, a plastic bag, or gauze pads covered with petroleum jelly, sealing it except for one corner. This allows trapped air to escape from the chest, but it prevents air from entering the chest through the wound. DO NOT 
 
 DO NOT: Give the person food or drink. Move the person if there has been a chest or airway injury, unless it is absolutely necessary. Place a pillow under the person's head. This can close the airway. Wait to see if the person's condition improves before getting medical help. Get help immediately. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or your local emergency number if you or someone else has any of the symptoms of difficult breathing, in the  Symptoms  section above.  Also call your health care provider right away if you: Have a cold or other respiratory infection and are having difficulty breathing Have a cough that does not go away after 2 or 3 weeks Are coughing up blood Are losing weight without meaning to or having night sweats Cannot get to sleep or wake up at night because of breathing difficulty Notice it is hard to breathe when doing things that you normally do without breathing difficulty, for example, climbing stairs  Also call your provider if your child has a cough and is making a barking sound.  Prevention 
 
 Some things you can do to help prevent breathing problems: If you have a history of severe allergic reactions, carry an epinephrine pen and wear a medical alert tag. Your provider will teach you how to use the epinephrine pen. If you have  asthma  or allergies, eliminate household allergy triggers like dust mites and mold. DO NOT smoke, and keep away from secondhand smoke. DO NOT allow smoking in your home. If you have asthma, see the article on asthma to learn ways to manage it. Make sure your child gets the whooping cough (pertussis)  vaccine . Make sure your tetanus booster is up to date. When traveling by airplane, get up and walk around every few hours to avoid forming blood clots in your legs. While seated, do ankle circles and raise and lower your heals, toes, and knees to increase blood flow in your legs. Clots can break off and lodge in your lungs. If traveling by car, stop and get out and walk around regularly. If you are overweight, lose weight. You are more likely to feel winded if you are overweight. You are also at greater risk for heart disease and heart attack.  Wear a medical alert tag if you have a pre-existing breathing condition, such as asthma. Alternative Names 
 
 Difficulty breathing - first aid; Dyspnea - first aid; Shortness of breath - first aid  Images 
 
 
 Collapsed lung, pneumothorax 
 Epiglottis 
 Breathing 
 References 
 
 Cukor, J, Manno M. Pediatric respiratory emergencies: upper airway obstruction and infections. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 168. Thomas SH, Goodloe, JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 60. Wippold FJ II. Diagnostic imaging of the larynx. In: Cummings CW, Flint PW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.  Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Abdominal thrusts 
 
 Review Date 4/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 CPR 
 First Aid 
 Browse the Encyclopedia