
 Breast ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Breast ultrasound is a test that uses sound waves to examine the breasts. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to undress from the waist up. You will be given a gown to wear.  During the test, you will lie on your back on an examining table. Your health care provider will place a gel on the skin of your breast. A hand-held device, called a transducer, is moved over the breast area. You may be asked to raise your arms above your head and turn to the left or right. The device sends sound waves to the breast tissue. The sound waves help create a picture that can be seen on a computer screen on the ultrasound machine.  The number of people involved in the test will be limited to protect your privacy. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may want to wear a two-piece outfit, so you do not have to completely undress.  On the day of your test, DO NOT use any lotion or powder on your breasts. DO NOT use deodorant under your arms. Remove jewelry from your neck and chest area. How the Test will Feel 
 
 This test usually does not cause any discomfort, although the gel may feel cool.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Breast ultrasound is usually ordered when more information is needed after other tests are done. These tests may include  mammogram  or  breast MRI . Your provider may order this test if you have:  A  breast lump  found during a breast exam An abnormal mammogram Clear or bloody  nipple discharge A breast ultrasound can: Help tell the difference between a solid mass or a  cyst Help look for a growth if you have clear or bloody fluid coming from your nipple Guide a needle during a  breast biopsy Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means the breast tissue appears normal.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Ultrasound can help show noncancerous growths such as: Cysts, which are, fluid-filled sacs Fibroadenomas , which are, noncancerous solid growths Lipomas, which are, noncancerous fatty lumps that can occur anywhere in the body, including the breasts  Breast cancers  can also be seen with ultrasound.  Follow-up tests to determine whether treatment may be needed include: Breast lump removal (lumpectomy) Open (surgical) breast biopsy Stereotactic (needle) breast biopsy Ultrasound-guided breast biopsy Risks 
 
 There are no risks associated with breast ultrasound. There is no radiation exposure. Alternative Names 
 
 Ultrasonography of the breast; Sonogram of the breast Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 References 
 
 Hacker NF, Friedland ML. Breast disease. In: Hacker NF, Gambone JC, Hobel CJ, eds.  Hacker and Moore's Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 30. Harvey JA, Mahoney MC, Newell MS, et al. ACR appropriateness criteria palpable breast masses.  J Am Coll Radiol . 2013;10:742-9.e1-3. PMID: 24091044  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24091044 . Hooley RJ, Scoutt LM, Philpotts LE. Breast ultrasonography: state of the art.  Radiology . 2013;268:642-59. PMID: 23970509  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23970509 . Wolfe AC, Domchek SM, Davidson NE, Sacchini V, McCormick B. Cancer of the breast. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 91. Read More 
 
 Fibrocystic breast disease 
 
 Review Date 10/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Cancer 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia