
 Breast lump 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A breast lump is swelling, a growth, or a lump in the breast.  Breast lumps in both men and women raise concern for  breast cancer , even though most lumps are not cancer. 
 Considerations 
 
 Both males and females of all ages have normal breast tissue. This tissue responds to hormone changes. Because of this, lumps can come and go. Breast lumps may appear at any age: Both male and female infants may have breast lumps from their mother's estrogen when they are born. The lump will most often go away on its own as the estrogen clears from the baby's body. Young girls often develop "breast buds," which appear just before the beginning of puberty. These bumps may be tender. They are common around age 9, but may happen as early as age 6. Teenage boys may develop breast enlargement and lumps because of hormone changes in mid-puberty. Although this may be upsetting to boys, the lumps or growth almost always go away on their own over a period of months.  Causes 
 
 Lumps in a woman are often caused by fibrocystic changes, fibroadenomas, and cysts. Fibrocystic changes  are painful, lumpy breasts. Fibrocystic breast changes do not increase your risk of breast cancer. Symptoms are most often worse right before your menstrual period, and then improve after your period starts.  Fibroadenomas  are noncancerous lumps that feel rubbery. They move easily inside the breast tissue. Like fibrocystic changes, they occur most often during the reproductive years.They are most often not tender. Except in rare cases, they do not become cancerous later. A health care provider can feel during an exam whether a lump is a fibroadenoma. The only way to be sure, however, is to remove or biopsy the lump. Cysts  are fluid-filled sacs that often feel like soft grapes. These can sometimes be tender, often just before your menstrual period.  Other causes of breast lumps include: Breast cancer. Injury. Blood may collect and feel like a lump if your breast gets badly bruised. These lumps tend to get better on their own in a few days or weeks. If they do not improve, your provider may have to drain the blood. Lipoma. This is a collection of fatty tissue. Milk cysts (sacs filled with milk) and infections ( mastitis ), which may turn into an  abscess . These typically occur if you are breastfeeding or have recently given birth.  Home Care 
 
 See your provider if you have any new lumps or breast changes. Ask about your risk factors for breast cancer, and screening and prevention for breast cancer. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: The skin on your breast appears dimpled or wrinkled (like the peel of an orange). You find a new breast lump during your monthly self-exam. You have bruising on your breast, but did not experience any injury. You have nipple discharge, especially if it is bloody or pinkish (blood-tinged). Your nipple is inverted (turned inward) but normally is not inverted. Also call if: You are a woman, age 20 or older, and want guidance on how to perform a breast self-exam. You are a woman over age 40 and have not had a mammogram in the past year. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will get a complete history from you. You will be asked about your factors that may increase the risk of  breast cancer . The provider will perform a thorough breast exam. If you don't know how to perform a breast self-exam, ask your provider to teach you the proper method. You may be asked medical history questions such as: When and how did you first notice the lump? Do you have other symptoms such as pain, nipple discharge, or fever? Where is the lump located? Do you do breast self-exams, and is this lump a recent change? Have you had any type of injury to your breast? Are you taking any hormones, medicines, or supplements?  Steps your provider may take next include: Order a mammogram to look for cancer, or a  breast ultrasound  to see if the lump is solid or a cyst Use a needle to draw fluid out of a cyst, which will be examined under a microscope to look for cancer cells Order a  breast biopsy Study any nipple discharge under a microscope  How a breast lump is treated depends on the cause.  Solid breast lumps are often removed with surgery. Cysts can be drained in the provider's office. If the fluid removed is clear or greenish, and the lump disappears after it is drained, you do not need further treatment. If the lump does not disappear or comes back, it is most often removed with surgery. Breast infections are treated with antibiotics. If you are diagnosed with  breast cancer , you will discuss your options carefully and thoroughly with your provider.  Alternative Names 
 
 Breast mass Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 Breast lumps 
 Fibrocystic breast disease 
 Fibroadenoma 
 Breast lump removal  - series 
 Causes of breast lumps 
 References 
 
 Hunt KK, Green MC, Buchholz TA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, et al, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Jacobs L, Hardin R. Management of benign breast disease. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:565-567. Swartz MH. The breast. In: Swartz MH, ed.  Textbook of Physical Diagnosis . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 13. Wolff AC, Domchek SM, Davidson NE, et al. Cancer of the breast. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, et al, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 91. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 
 Review Date 10/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Cancer 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia