
 Broad nasal bridge 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Broad nasal bridge is a widening of the top part of the nose. Considerations 
 
 Broad nasal bridge can be a normal facial feature. However, it can also be associated with certain genetic or congenital (present from birth) disorders. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Basal cell nevus syndrome Fetal hydantoin effect (mother took the drug hydantoin during pregnancy) Normal facial feature Other congenital syndromes Home Care 
 
 There is no need to treat broad nasal bridge. Other conditions that have broad nasal bridge as a symptom may need medical attention. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You feel that the shape of your child's nose is interfering with breathing You have questions about your child's nose What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. Provider may also ask questions about the person's family and medical history. Images 
 
 
 The face 
 Broad nasal bridge 
 References 
 
 Chambers C, Scialli AR. Teratogenesis and environmental exposure. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ, Moore TR, Greene MF, eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 31. Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo MD. Facial defects as major feature. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo MD, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap H. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl ED, Ariss MM, Lindquist TP. Disorders of eye movement and alignment. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 623. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia