
 Brompheniramine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brompheniramine is a type of medicine called an antihistamine, which helps relieve allergy symptoms. Brompheniramine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Brompheniramine and brompheniramine maleate are the poisonous ingredients in this medicine.  Where Found 
 
 Brompheniramine may be found in the following brand-name products: Bromphen Chlorphed Dimetane Dimetapp  Other medicines may also contain brompheniramine. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of a brompheniramine overdose in different parts of the body. BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Cannot urinate Difficulty urinating  EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Blurred vision Dilated pupils Dry mouth Ringing in the ears  HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS Rapid heartbeat Increased blood pressure  NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Coma Convulsions Delirium Disorientation Drowsiness Fever Hallucinations Nervousness Tremor Unsteadiness Weakness  SKIN Flushed skin  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Nausea Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready:  Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the medicine (and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and ventilator (breathing machine) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Laxatives Medicine to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the person survives the first 24 hours, chances of survival are good. Few people actually die from an antihistamine overdose. With very high doses of antihistamines, serious heart rhythm disturbances may occur. This can cause death. Keep all medicines in child-proof bottles and out of the reach of children. References 
 
 Kirk MA, Baer AB. Anticholinergics and antihistamines. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 39. Simons FER, Akdis CA. Histamine and H1 antihistamines. In: Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 94. Velez LI, Feng S-Y. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150. 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cold and Cough Medicines 
 Browse the Encyclopedia