
 Bronchiectasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bronchiectasis is a disease in which the large airways in the lungs are damaged. This causes the airways to become wider. Bronchiectasis can be present at birth or infancy or develop later in life. Causes 
 
 Bronchiectasis is often caused by inflammation or infection of the airways that keeps coming back. Sometimes it begins in childhood after having a severe lung infection or  inhaling a foreign object . Breathing in food particles can also lead to this condition. Other causes of bronchiectasis can include: Cystic fibrosis , a disease that causes thick, sticky mucus to build up in the lungs Autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis or  Crohn disease Allergic lung diseases Leukemia and related cancers Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms develop over time. They may occur months or years after the event that causes the bronchiectasis. Long-term (chronic) cough with large amounts of foul smelling sputum is the main symptom of bronchiectasis. Other symptoms may include: Breath odor Clubbing  of fingers (rare) Coughing up blood Fatigue Paleness Shortness of breath  that gets worse with exercise Weight loss Wheezing Low grade fever and night sweats Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. When listening to the chest with a stethoscope, the provider may hear small clicking, bubbling, wheezing, rattling, or other sounds, usually in the lower lungs. Tests that may be done include: Aspergillosis precipitin test (to check for signs of an allergic reaction to fungus) Alpha-1 antitrypsin blood test Chest x-ray Chest CT Sputum culture Complete blood count  (CBC) Genetic testing, including  sweat test  for cystic fibrosis and tests for other diseases PPD skin test  to check for a past tuberculosis infection Serum immunoglobulin electrophoresis  to measure proteins called immunoglobulins in the blood Lung function tests  to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at controlling infections and sputum, relieving  airway blockage , and preventing the problem from becoming worse. Daily drainage to remove sputum is part of treatment. A respiratory therapist can show the person coughing exercises that will help. Medicines are often prescribed. These include: Antibiotics to treat infections Bronchodilators to open up airways Expectorants to help loosen and cough up thick sputum Surgery to remove ( resect ) the lung may be needed if medicine does not work and the disease is in a small area, or if the person has a lot of bleeding in the lungs. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the specific cause of the disease. With treatment, most people live without major disability. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of bronchiectasis may include: Cor pulmonale Coughing up blood Low oxygen levels (in severe cases) Recurrent  pneumonia Depression When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Chest pain  or shortness of breath gets worse There is a change in the color or amount of phlegm you cough up, or if it is bloody Other symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment  Prevention 
 
 You can reduce your risk by promptly treating lung infections. Childhood  vaccines  and a yearly flu vaccine help reduce the chance of some infections. Avoiding upper respiratory infections, smoking, and pollution may also reduce your risk of getting this infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Acquired bronchiectasis; Congenital bronchiectasis; Chronic lung disease - brochiectasis Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Chan ED, Iseman MD. Bronchiectasis. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 48. O'Donnell AE. Bronchiectasis, atelectasis, cysts, and localized lung disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 90. Read More 
 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Foreign object - inhaled or swallowed 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Lung surgery - discharge  
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Bronchial Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia