
 Bronchiolitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bronchiolitis is swelling and mucus buildup in the smallest air passages in the lungs (bronchioles). It is usually due to a viral infection. Causes 
 
 Bronchiolitis usually affects children under the age of 2, with a peak age of 3 to 6 months. It is a common, and sometimes severe illness.  Respiratory syncytial virus  (RSV) is the most common cause. More than half of all infants are exposed to this virus by their first birthday. Other viruses that can cause bronchiolitis include: Adenovirus Influenza Parainfluenza The virus is spread to infants by coming into direct contact with nose and throat fluids of someone who has the illness. This can happen when another child or an adult who has a virus: Sneezes or coughs nearby and tiny droplets in the air are then breathed in by the infant Touches toys or other objects that are then touched by the infant Bronchiolitis occurs more often in the fall and winter than other times of the year. It is a very common reason for infants to be hospitalized during winter and early spring. Risk factors of bronchiolitis include: Being around cigarette smoke Being younger than 6 months old Living in crowded conditions Not being breastfed Being born before 37 weeks of pregnancy Symptoms 
 
 Some children have few or mild symptoms. Bronchiolitis begins as a mild upper respiratory infection. Within 2 to 3 days, the child develops more breathing problems, including wheezing and a cough. Symptoms include: Bluish skin  due to lack of oxygen (cyanosis) - emergency treatment is needed Breathing difficulty including wheezing and shortness of breath Cough Fatigue Fever Muscles around the ribs sink in as the child tries to breathe in (called  intercostal retractions ) Infant's nostrils get wide when breathing Rapid breathing (tachypnea)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam.  Wheezing  and crackling sounds may be heard through the stethoscope. Tests that may be done include: Blood gases Chest x-ray Culture of a sample of nasal fluid to determine the virus causing the disease Treatment 
 
 The main focus of treatment is to relieve symptoms, such as difficulty breathing and wheezing. Antibiotics do not work against viral infections. Medicines that treat viruses may be used to treat very ill children. At home, measures to relieve symptoms  can be used. Have your child: Drink plenty of fluids. Breast milk or formula  is fine for children younger than 12 months. Electrolyte drinks, such as Pedialyte, are also OK for infants. Breathe moist (wet) air to help loosen sticky mucus. Use a humidifier to moisten the air. Get plenty of rest. Do not allow anyone to smoke in the house, car, or anywhere near your child. Children who are having trouble breathing may need to stay in the hospital. There, treatment may include oxygen therapy and fluids given through a vein (IV). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Breathing often gets better by the third day and symptoms mostly clear within a week. In rare cases, pneumonia or more severe breathing problems develop. Some children may have problems with wheezing or asthma as they get older. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away or go to the emergency room if your child: Becomes extremely tired Has bluish color in the skin, nails, or lips Starts breathing very fast Has a cold that suddenly worsens Has difficulty breathing Has nostril flarings or  chest retractions  when trying to breathe Prevention 
 
 Most cases of bronchiolitis cannot be prevented because the viruses that cause the infection are common in the environment. Careful hand washing, especially around infants, can help prevent the spread of viruses. A medicine called palivizumab (Synagis) that boosts the immune system may be recommended for certain children. Your child's doctor will let you know if this medicine is right for your child. Images 
 
 
 Bronchiolitis 
 Normal lungs and alveoli 
 References 
 
 Bower J, McBride JT. Bronchiolitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 68. Coates BM, Camarda LE, Goodman DM. Wheezing, bronchiolitis, and bronchitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 391. Ralston SL, Lieberthal AS, Meissner HC, et al, American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline: the diagnosis, management, and prevention of bronchiolitis.  Pediatrics.  2014;134:e1474-e1502. PMID: 25349312  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25349312 . 
  Read More 
 
 Hyperventilation 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bronchiolitis - discharge 
 How to breathe when you are short of breath 
 Oxygen safety 
 Postural drainage  
 Using oxygen at home 
 Using oxygen at home - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Bethanne Black, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Bronchitis 
 Bronchial Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia