
 Bronchoscopic culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bronchoscopic culture is a laboratory exam to check a piece of tissue or fluid from the lungs for infection-causing germs. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A procedure called  bronchoscopy  
is used to get a sample ( biopsy ) of lung tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria or other disease-causing germs grow. Treatment is based on the results of the culture. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 
 Follow your health care provider's instructions on how to prepare for bronchoscopy. How the Test will Feel 
 
 
 Your provider will tell you what to expect during bronchoscopy. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A bronchoscopic culture is done to find infection in the lung that cannot be accurately detected by a  sputum culture . The procedure may find the following things, such as: Abnormal secretions Abnormal lung tissue Abscesses Inflammation Obstructive lesions, such as cancer or foreign bodies Normal Results 
 
 No organisms are seen on the culture. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal culture results usually indicate a respiratory infection. The infection may be caused by bacteria, viruses, parasites, mycobacteria, or fungi. The results of the culture will help determine the best treatment. Not all organisms found with bronchoscopic culture need to be treated. Your provider will tell you more about this if needed. Risks 
 
 Your provider can discuss the risks of the bronchoscopy procedure with you.  Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - bronchoscopic Images 
 
 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Bronchoscopic culture 
 References 
 
 

Kupeli E, Feller-Kopman D, Mehta AC. Diagnostic bronchoscopy. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 22. Yung RC, Flint PW. Tracheobronchial endoscopy. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Routine sputum culture 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia