
 Brown recluse spider 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brown recluse spiders are between 1 and 1 1/2 inches (2.5 to 3.5 centimeters) long. They have a dark brown, violin-shaped mark on their upper body and light brown legs. Their lower body may be dark brown, tan, yellow, or greenish. They also have 3 pairs of eyes, instead of the usual 4 pairs other spiders have. The bite of a brown recluse spider is poisonous. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage a brown recluse spider bite. If you or someone you are with is bitten, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The venom of the brown recluse spider contains poisonous chemicals that make people sick. Where Found 
 
 The brown recluse spider is most common in the south and central states of the United States, especially in Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Louisiana, eastern Texas, and Oklahoma. However, they have been found in several large cities outside these areas. The brown recluse spider prefers dark, sheltered areas such as under porches and in woodpiles. Symptoms 
 
 When the spider bites you, you may feel a sharp sting or nothing at all. Pain usually develops within the first several hours after being bitten, and may become severe. Children may have more serious reactions. Symptoms may include: Chills Itching General ill-feeling or discomfort Fever Nausea Reddish or purplish color in a circle around bite Sweating Large sore (ulcer) in the area of the bite  Rarely, these symptoms may occur: Coma Blood in urine Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) Kidney failure Seizures  Home Care 
 
 Seek emergency medical treatment right away. Call 911 or the local emergency number, or poison control.  Wash the area with soap and water. Wrap ice in a clean cloth and place it on the bite area. Leave it on for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has blood flow problems, decrease the time that the ice is on the area to prevent possible skin damage. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The body part affected The time the bite occurred The type of spider, if known Take the person to the emergency room for treatment. The bite may not look serious, but it can take some time to become severe. Treatment is important to reduce complications. If possible, place the spider in a secure container and bring it to the emergency room for identification. Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning, including insect bites. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the spider to the hospital with you, if possible. Make sure it is in a secure container. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. Because brown recluse spider bites can be painful, pain medicines may be given. Antibiotics may also be prescribed if the wound is infected. If the wound is near a joint (such as a knee or elbow), the arm or leg may be placed into a brace or sling. If possible, the arm or leg will be elevated. In more serious reactions the person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  The brown recluse spider bite can leave a large sore in the skin and ugly scarring. The person may need surgery weeks later to improve the appearance of the scar. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With proper medical attention, survival past 48 hours is usually a sign that recovery will follow. An ulcer may take up to 6 weeks to heal, with proper care. Death from brown recluse spider bites is more common in children than adults.  Wear protective clothing when traveling through areas where these spiders live. DO NOT stick your hands or feet in their nests or in their preferred hiding places, such as dark, sheltered areas under logs or underbrush, or other damp, moist areas. Alternative Names 
 
 Loxosceles reclusa Images 
 
 
 Arthropods, basic features 
 Arachnids, basic features 
 Brown recluse spider bite on the hand 
 References 
 
 Boyer LV, Greta J. Binford GJ, et al. Spider bites. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 52. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. Peterson ME. Brown spider envenomation.  Clin Tech Small Anim Practice . 2006;21(4):191-193. PMID: 17265904  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17265904 .  
 Review Date 7/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spider Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia