
 Brucellosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brucellosis is an infectious disease that occurs from contact with animals carrying brucella bacteria. Causes 
 
 Brucella can infect cattle, goats, camels, dogs, and pigs. The bacteria can spread to humans if you come in contact with infected meat or the placenta of infected animals, or if you eat or drink unpasteurized milk or cheese. Brucellosis is rare in the United States. About 100 to 200 cases occur each year. Most cases are caused by the  Brucellosis melitensis  bacteria. People working in jobs where they often come in contact with animals or meat -- such as slaughterhouse workers, farmers, and veterinarians -- are at higher risk. Symptoms 
 
 Acute  brucellosis may begin with mild  flu-like  symptoms, or symptoms such as: Abdominal pain Back pain Chills Excessive sweating Fatigue Fever Headache Joint and muscle pain Loss of appetite Swollen glands Weakness Weight loss High fever spikes often occur every afternoon. The name undulant fever is often used to describe this disease because the fever rises and falls in waves. The illness may be  chronic  and last for years. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. You'll also be asked if you've been in contact with animals or possibly eaten dairy products that were not pasteurized.  Tests that may be done include: Blood culture Bone marrow culture Urine culture CSF (spinal fluid) culture Serology (blood test) for brucellosis  antigen Biopsy and culture of specimen from affected organ Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics, such as doxycycline, streptomycin, gentamicin, and rifampin, are used to treat the infection and prevent it from coming back. Often, you need to take the drugs for 6 weeks. If there are complications from brucellosis, you will likely need to take the drugs for a longer period. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms may come and go for years. Also, the illness can come back after a long period of not having symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from brucellosis include: Bone and joint sores (lesions) Encephalitis Infective endocarditis Meningitis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if: You develop symptoms of brucellosis Your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment You develop new symptoms Prevention 
 
 Drinking and eating only pasteurized dairy products, such as milk and cheeses, is the most important way to reduce the risk of brucellosis. People who handle meat should wear protective eyewear and clothing, and protect  skin breaks  from infection. Detecting infected animals controls the infection at its source. Vaccination is available for cattle, but not humans. Alternative Names 
 
 Cyprus fever; Undulant fever; Gibraltar fever; Malta fever; Mediterranean fever Images 
 
 
 Brucellosis 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Beeching NJ, Madkour MM. Brucellosis. In: Farrar J, Hotez PJ, Junghanss T, Kang G, Lalloo D, White NJ, eds.  Manson's Tropical Diseases . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 28. Gul HC, Erdem H. Brucellosis ( Brucella  species). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 228. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Chronic 
 Encephalitis 
 Fever 
 Flu 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia