
 Bullous pemphigoid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bullous pemphigoid is a skin disorder characterized by large  blisters . Causes 
 
 Bullous pemphigoid is an  autoimmune disorder  which occurs when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake. This disorder usually occurs in older persons and is rare in young people. Symptoms come and go. In most patients, the condition goes away within 5 years. Symptoms 
 
 Some people have no symptoms. Others may have mild redness, itching and irritation. In many cases, they are many blisters, called  bullae . Blisters are usually located on the arms, legs, or middle of the body. The blisters may break open and form  ulcers  or open sores. Some people also develop blisters in the mouth.  Other symptoms may include: Itching Rashes  that resemble  hives Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done to help diagnose this condition include:  Blood tests Skin biopsy  of the blister or the area next to it
   Treatment 
 
 Powerful anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids may be prescribed. They may be taken by mouth or applied to the skin. Medicines to help suppress the immune system may be prescribed. Antibiotics in the tetracycline family may be useful.  Niacin  (a B complex vitamin) is sometimes given along with tetracycline. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Bullous pemphigoid usually responds well to treatment. Most patients stop taking medicine after several years. The disease sometimes returns after treatment is stopped. Possible Complications 
 
 Skin infection is the most common complication. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your doctor for an appointment if you have:  Unexplained blisters on your skin An itchy rash that continues despite home treatment Images 
 
 
 Bullous pemphigoid, close-up of tense blisters 
 References 
 
 

Bernard P, Borradori L. Pemphigoid group. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 30. Scott M, Werth VP. Bullous pemphigoid. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 32. Read More 
 
 Vesicles 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pemphigus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia