
 C1 esterase inhibitor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 C1 esterase inhibitor (C1-INH) is a protein found in the fluid part of your blood. It controls a protein called C1, which is part of the complement system. This system is a group of proteins that move freely through your bloodstream. The proteins work with your immune system and play a role in the development of inflammation. There are nine major complement proteins. They are labeled C1 through C9. Complement factors are very important in testing for autoimmune diseases, especially  systemic lupus erythematosus . Low levels of C1-INH can lead to a condition called angioedema. Angioedema results in sudden swelling of the tissues of the face, upper throat and tongue and may cause difficulty breathing. Swelling in the intestine and abdominal pain may also occur. There are two types of conditions that cause angioedema from decreased levels of C1-INH. They are known as  hereditary  and acquired C1-INH deficiency. This article discusses the test that is done to measure the amount of C1-INH in your blood.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. This is most often taken through a vein. The procedure is called a  venipuncture . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test if you have signs of hereditary or acquired angioedema. Both forms of angioedema are caused by low levels of C1-INH. Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Your health care provider will also measure the functional activity level of your C1 esterase inhibitor. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Low levels of C1-INH may cause certain types of angioedema. Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 C1 inhibiting factor; C1-INH Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Bowen T, Cicardi M, Farkas H, et al. 2010 International consensus algorithm for the diagnosis, therapy and management of hereditary angioedema.  Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol . 2010;6:24. PMID: 20667127  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20667127 .  Sullivan KE, Grumach AS. The complement system. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 6.  Read More 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Complement 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hepatitis 
 Hereditary angioedema 
 Kidney transplant 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Edema 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia