
 Calcium supplements 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 WHO SHOULD TAKE CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTS? Calcium is an important mineral for the human body. It helps build and protect your teeth and bones. Getting enough calcium over your lifetime can help prevent  osteoporosis . Most people get enough calcium in their normal diet. Dairy foods and leafy green vegetables have high levels of calcium. Older women and men may need extra calcium to prevent their bones from getting thin (osteoporosis). Your health care provider will tell you if you need to take extra calcium. TYPES OF CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTS  Forms of calcium include: Calcium carbonate: Over-the-counter (OTC) antacid products, such as Tums and Rolaids, contain calcium carbonate. These sources of calcium do not cost much. Each pill or chew provides 200 to 400 mg of calcium. Calcium citrate: This is a more expensive form of calcium. It is absorbed well on an empty or full stomach. People with low levels of stomach acid (a condition that is more common in people over age 50) absorb calcium citrate better than calcium carbonate. Other forms, such as calcium gluconate, calcium lactate, calcium phosphate: Most have less calcium than the carbonate and citrate forms.  When choosing a calcium supplement: Look the word "purified" or the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) symbol on the label. Avoid products made from unrefined oyster shell, bone meal, or dolomite that do not have the USP symbol. They may have high levels of lead or other toxic metals.  HOW TO TAKE EXTRA CALCIUM  Increase the dose of your calcium supplement slowly. Start with 500 mg a day for a week, and then add more over time. Try to spread the extra calcium you take over the day. DO NOT take more than 500 mg at a time. Taking calcium throughout the day will: Allow more calcium to be absorbed Cut down on side effects such as gas, bloating, and constipation  The total amount of calcium adults need every day from food and calcium supplements: 19 to 50 years: 1,000 mg/day 51 to 70 years: Men - 1,000 mg/day; Women - 1,200 mg/day 71 years and over: 1,200 mg/day  The body needs vitamin D to help absorb calcium. You can get vitamin D from sunlight exposure to your skin and from your diet. Ask your provider whether you need to take a vitamin D supplement. SIDE EFFECTS AND SAFETY DO NOT take more than the recommended amount of calcium without your provider's ok. Try the following steps if you have side effects from taking extra calcium:  Drink more fluids. Eat high-fiber foods Switch to another form of calcium if the diet changes do not help.  Always tell your provider and pharmacist if you are taking extra calcium. Calcium supplements may change the way your body absorbs some medicines. These include certain types of antibiotics and iron pills. Be aware of the following: Taking extra calcium over a long period of time raises the risk of  kidney stones  in some people. Too much calcium can prevent the body from absorbing iron, zinc, magnesium, and phosphorus. Antacids have other ingredients such as sodium, aluminum, and sugar. Ask your provider if antacids are ok for you use as a calcium supplement.  References 
 
 Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board.  Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorous, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride . National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2010. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D and calcium supplementation to prevent fractures in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;158:691-6. PMID 23440163  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23440163 . NIH Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases National Resource Center. Calcium and vitamin D: Important at every age. Reviewed January 2012. Available at: www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Bone/Bone_Health/Nutrition. Accessed February 20, 2015. Rosen C. Osteoporosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 251. The National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF).  Clinician's Guide to prevention and treatment of osteoporosis . National Osteoporosis Foundation, Washington, DC. 2013. 
 Review Date 2/8/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Calcium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia