
 Caloric stimulation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Caloric stimulation is a test that uses differences in temperature to diagnose damage to the acoustic nerve. This is the nerve that is involved in hearing and balance. The test also checks for damage to the brain stem. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test stimulates your acoustic nerve by delivering cold or warm water or air into your ear canal. When cold water or air enters your ear and the inner ear changes temperature, it should cause fast, side-to-side eye movements called nystagmus. The test is done in the following way: Before the test, your ear, especially the eardrum, will be checked. This is to make sure it is normal. One ear is tested at a time. A small amount of cold water or air is gently delivered into one of your ears. Your eyes should show an involuntary movement called nystagmus. Then they should turn away from that ear and slowly back. If water is used, it is allowed to drain out of the ear canal. Next, a small amount of warm water or air is gently delivered into the same ear. Again, your eyes should show nystagmus. Then they should turn toward that ear and slowly back. Your other ear is tested in the same way. During the test, the health care provider may observe your eyes directly. Most often, this test is done as part of another test called  electronystagmography . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not eat a heavy meal before the test. Avoid the following at least 24 hours before the test, because they can affect the results: Alcohol Allergy medicines Caffeine Sedatives Do not stop taking your regular medicines without first talking to your doctor. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may find the cold water or air in the ear uncomfortable. You may feel your eyes scanning back and forth during nystagmus. You may have  vertigo , and sometimes, you can also have nausea. This lasts only a very short time. Vomiting is rare. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be used to find the cause of: Dizziness or vertigo Hearing loss that may be due to certain antibiotics or other drugs It may also be done to look for brain damage in persons who are in a  coma . Normal Results 
 
 Rapid, side-to-side eye movements should occur when cold or warm water is placed into the ear. The eye movements should be similar on both sides. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If the rapid, side-to-side eye movements do not occur even after ice cold water is given, there may be damage to the: Nerve of the inner ear Balance sensors of the inner ear Brain  Abnormal results may be due to: Poor blood supply to the ear Bleeding (hemorrhage) Blood clot Brain or brain stem damage Cholesteatoma Birth defects of the ear structure or brain Damage to the ear nerves Poisoning Rubella  that damages the acoustic nerve Trauma  The test may also be done to diagnose or rule out: Acoustic neuroma Benign positional vertigo Labyrinthitis Meniere disease Risks 
 
 Too much water pressure can injure an already damaged eardrum. This rarely occurs because the amount of water to be used is measured. Water caloric stimulation should not be done if the eardrum is torn (perforated). This is because it can cause an  ear infection . It also should not be done during an episode of vertigo because it can make symptoms worse. Alternative Names 
 
 Caloric test; Bithermal caloric testing; Cold water calorics; Warm water calorics; Air caloric testing References 
 
 Baloh RW, Jen JC. Hearing and equilibrium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 428. Kerber KA, Baloh RW. Neuro-otology: diagnosis and management of neuro-otological disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 37. Read More 
 
 Acoustic neuroma 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Anemia 
 Benign ear cyst or tumor 
 Benign positional vertigo 
 Cholesteatoma 
 Dizziness 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Labyrinthitis 
 Ménière disease 
 Rubella 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dizziness and Vertigo 
 Ear Disorders 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Meniere's Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia