
 Carotid duplex 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Carotid duplex is an  ultrasound  test that shows how well blood is flowing through the carotid arteries. The carotid arteries are located in the neck. They supply blood directly to the brain. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Ultrasound is a painless method that uses sound waves to create images of the inside of the body. The test is done in a vascular lab or radiology department.  The test is done in the following way: You lie on your back. Your head is supported to keep it from moving. The ultrasound technician applies a water-based gel to your neck to help with the transmission of the sound waves. Next, the technician moves a wand called a transducer back and forth over the area. The device sends sound waves to the arteries in your neck. The sound waves bounce off the blood vessels and form images or pictures of the insides of the arteries.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No preparation is necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel some pressure as the transducer is moved around your neck. The pressure should not cause any pain. You may also hear a "whooshing" sound. This is normal. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test checks blood flow in the carotid arteries. It can detect: Blood clotting (thrombosis) Narrowing in the arteries (stenosis) Other causes of blockage in the carotid arteries  Your doctor may order this test if: You have had a  stroke  or  transient ischemic attack  (TIA) You need a follow-up test because your carotid artery was found to be narrowed in the past or you have had surgery on the artery Your doctor hears an abnormal sound called a bruit over the carotid neck arteries. This may mean the artery is narrowed.  Normal Results 
 
 The results will tell your doctor how open or narrowed your carotid arteries are. For example, the arteries may be 10% narrowed, 50% narrowed, or 75% narrowed. A normal result means there is no problem with the blood flow in the carotid arteries. The artery is free of any significant blockage, narrowing, or other problem. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means the artery may be narrowed, or something is changing the blood flow in the carotid arteries. This is a sign of  atherosclerosis  or other blood vessel conditions. In general, the more narrowed the artery is, the higher your risk of stroke. Depending on the results, your doctor may want you to: Consider  surgery Have additional tests (such as  cerebral angiography , CT angiography, and  magnetic resonance angiography ) Follow a healthy diet and lifestyle to prevent  hardening of the arteries Repeat the test again in the future  Risks 
 
 There are no risks with having this procedure. Alternative Names 
 
 Scan - carotid duplex; Carotid ultrasound; Carotid artery ultrasound; Ultrasound - carotid; Vascular ultrasound - carotid; Ultrasound - vascular - carotid Images 
 
 
 Carotid stenosis, x-ray of the left artery 
 Carotid stenosis, x-ray of the right artery 
 Carotid duplex 
 References 
 
 Daly C, Rodriguez HE. Carotid artery occlusive disease.  Surg Clin N Am . 2013;93(4):813-832. PMID: 23885933  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23885933 . Kaufman JA, Nesbit GM. Carotid and vertebral arteries. In: Kaufman JA, Lee MJ, eds.  Vascular and Interventional Radiology: The Requisites . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 5. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Ultrasound 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Carotid artery surgery - discharge 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN), Gainesville, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carotid Artery Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia