
 Carpal tunnel biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Carpal tunnel biopsy is a test in which a small piece of tissue is removed from the carpal tunnel (part of the wrist). How the Test is Performed 
 
 The skin of your wrist is cleansed and injected with medicine that numbs the area. Through a small cut, a sample of tissue is removed from the carpal tunnel. This is done by direct removal of tissue or by needle  aspiration . Sometimes this procedure is done at the same time as  carpal tunnel release . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Follow instructions for not eating or drinking anything for a few hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel some stinging or burning when the numbing medicine is injected. You may also feel some pressure or tugging during the procedure. Afterward, the area may be tender or sore for a few days. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is often done to see if you have a condition called  amyloidosis . It is not usually done to diagnose  carpal tunnel syndrome . However, a person with amyloidosis can have carpal tunnel syndrome. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a condition in which there is excessive pressure on the median nerve. This is the nerve in the wrist that allows feeling and movement to parts of the hand. Carpal tunnel syndrome can lead to numbness, tingling, weakness, or muscle damage in the hand and fingers. Normal Results 
 
 No abnormal tissues are found. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means that you have amyloidosis. Risks 
 
 Risks of this procedure include: Bleeding Damage to the nerve in this area Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - carpal tunnel Images 
 
 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Surface anatomy - normal palm 
 Surface anatomy - normal wrist 
 Carpal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Calandruccio JH. Carpal tunnel syndrome, ulnar tunnel syndrome, and stenosing tenosynovitis. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 76. Hawkins PN. Amyloidosis. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 168. Read More 
 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amyloidosis 
 Biopsy 
 Carpal Tunnel Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia