
 Cat-scratch disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cat-scratch disease is an infection with bartonella bacteria that is believed to be transmitted by cat scratches, cat bites, or flea bites. Causes 
 
 Cat-scratch disease is caused by the bacteria  Bartonella henselae . The disease is spread through contact with an infected cat (a bite or scratch) or exposure to cat fleas. It also can be spread through contact with cat saliva on broken skin or mucosal surfaces like those in the nose, mouth, and eyes. Symptoms 
 
 A person who has had contact with an infected cat may show common symptoms, including: Bump ( papule ) or blister ( pustule ) at site of injury (usually the first sign) Fatigue Fever (in some people) Headache Lymph node swelling ( lymphadenopathy ) near the site of the scratch or bite Overall discomfort ( malaise )  Less common symptoms may include: Loss of appetite Sore throat Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 If you have swollen lymph nodes and a scratch or bite from a cat, your health care provider may suspect cat-scratch disease. A physical examination may also reveal an  enlarged spleen . Sometimes, an infected lymph node may form a tunnel ( fistula ) through the skin and drain (leak fluid). This disease is often not found because it is hard to diagnose. The  Bartonella henselae  immunofluorescence assay (IFA) blood test is an accurate way to detect the infection caused by these bacteria. The results of this test must be considered along with other information from your medical history, lab tests, or biopsy. A  lymph node biopsy  may also be done to look for other causes of swollen glands. Treatment 
 
 Generally, cat-scratch disease is not serious. Medical treatment may not be needed. In some cases, treatment with antibiotics such as azithromycin can be helpful. Other antibiotics may be used, including clarithromycin, rifampin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or ciprofloxacin. In people with  HIV/AIDS  and others, who have a weakened immune system, cat-scratch disease is more serious. Treatment with antibiotics is recommended. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who have a healthy immune system should recover fully without treatment. In people with a weakened immune system, treatment with antibiotics usually leads to recovery. Possible Complications 
 
 People whose immune systems are weakened may develop complications such as: Encephalopathy Neuroretinitis Osteomyelitis Parinaud syndrome  (granulomatous conjunctivitis with adenopathy)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have enlarged lymph nodes and you have been exposed to a cat. Prevention 
 
 To prevent cat-scratch disease: Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water after playing with your cat. Especially wash any bites or scratches. Play gently with cats so they don't scratch and bite. Don't allow a cat to lick your skin, eyes, mouth, or open wounds or scratches. Use flea control measures to lower the risk your cat develops the disease. Don't touch feral cats. Alternative Names 
 
 CSD; Cat-scratch fever; Bartonellosis Images 
 
 
 Cat scratch disease 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Gandhi TN, Slater LN, Welch DF, Koehler JE.  Bartonella , including cat-scratch disease. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 236. Wiener AH, Selkin BA, Murakawa GJ. Cat scratch disease. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 37. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Conjunctiva 
 Fistula 
 Lymphofollicular hyperplasia 
 Neuroretinitis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cat Scratch Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia