
 Catecholamines - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Catecholamines are chemicals made by nerve tissue (including the brain) and the adrenal gland. The main types of catecholamines are dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. These chemicals break down into other components, which leave your body through your urine. A urine test can be done to measure the level of catecholamines in your body. Separate urine tests may be done to measure related substances.  Catecholamines can also be measured with a  blood test .  How the Test is Performed 
 
 For this test, you must collect your urine in a special bag or container every time you urinate for 24-hour period. On day 1, urinate over the toilet when you wake up in the morning and discard that urine. Urinate into the special container every time you use the bathroom for the next 24 hours. Keep it in the refrigerator or a cool place during the collection period. On day 2, urinate into the container in the morning again when you wake up. Label the container with your name, the date, the time of completion, and return it as instructed.  For an infant, thoroughly wash the area where urine exits the body. Open a urine collection bag (a plastic bag with an adhesive paper on one end). For males, place the entire  penis  in the bag and attach the adhesive to the skin. For females, place the bag over the labia. Diaper as usual over the secured bag.  This procedure may take a few tries. An active baby can move the bag causing urine to go into the diaper. Check the infant often and change the bag after the infant has urinated into it. Drain the urine from the bag into the container provided by your health care provider. Deliver the sample to the laboratory or to your provider as soon as possible. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Stress  and heavy exercise may affect the test results. Some foods can increase catacholamines in your urine. You may need to avoid the follow foods for several days before the test: Coffee Tea Bananas Chocolate Cocoa Citrus fruits Vanilla  Many medicines can interfere with test results. Your provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is usually done to diagnose an adrenal gland tumor called  pheochromocytoma . It may also be used to diagnose  neuroblastoma . Urine catecholamine levels are increased in most persons with neuroblastoma. The urine test for catecholamines may also be used to monitor those who are receiving treatment for these conditions. Normal Results 
 
 All of the catecholamines are broken down into inactive substances that appear in the urine: Dopamine becomes homovanillic acid (HVA) Norepinephrine becomes normetanephrine and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) Epinephrine becomes metanephrine and VMA  The following normal values are the amount of the substance found in the urine over a 24-hour period: Dopamine: 65 to 400 micrograms (mcg)/24 hours (425 to 2610 nmol/24 hours) Epinephrine: 0.5 to 20 mcg/24 hours Metanephrine: 24 to 96 mcg/24 hours (some laboratories give the range as 140 to 785 mcg/24 hours) Norepinephrine: 15 to 80 mcg/24 hours (89 to 473 nmol/24 hours) Normetanephrine: 75 to 375 mcg/24 hours Total urine catecholamines: 14 to 110 mcg/24 hours VMA: 2 to 7 milligrams (mg)/24 hours (10.09 mcmol/24 hours) Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Elevated levels of urinary catecholamines may indicate: Acute  anxiety Ganglioneuroblastoma  (very rare) Ganglioneuroma  (very rare) Neuroblastoma (rare) Pheochromocytoma (rare) Severe stress  The test may also be performed for: Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 Several foods and drugs, as well as physical activity and stress, can affect the accuracy of this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Dopamine-urine test; Epinephrine-urine test; Adrenalin-urine test; Urine metanephrine; Normetanephrine; Norepinephrine-urine test; Urine catecholamines; VMA; HVA; Metanephrine; Homovanillic acid (HVA) Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Catecholamine urine test 
 References 
 
 Young WF. Adrenal medulla, catecholamines, and pheochromocytoma. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 228. Read More 
 
 Catecholamine blood test 
 Ganglioneuroblastoma 
 Ganglioneuroma 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Neuroblastoma 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neuroblastoma 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia