
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a rare disease of the immune and nervous systems. It involves pale-colored hair, eyes, and skin. Causes 
 
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome is passed down through families (inherited). It is an  autosomal recessive  disease. This means that both parents are carriers of a non-working copy of the gene. Each parent must pass their non-working gene to the child for them to show symptoms of the disease. Defects have been found in the  CHS1  (also called  LYST ) gene. The primary defect in this disease is found in certain substances normally present in skin cells and certain white blood cells. Symptoms 
 
 Children with this condition may have: Silver hair, light-colored eyes (albinism) Increased infections in the lungs, skin, and mucous membranes Jerky eye movements ( nystagmus ) Infection of affected children with certain viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ), can cause a deadly illness resembling the blood cancer  lymphoma . Other symptoms may include: Decreased vision Intellectual disability Muscle weakness Nerve problems in the limbs ( peripheral neuropathy ) Nosebleeds or easy bruising Numbness Tremor Seizures Sensitivity to bright light (photophobia) Unsteady walking ( ataxia ) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show signs of a swollen spleen or liver or jaundice. Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count, including white blood cell count Blood platelet count Blood culture and smear Brain MRI or CT EEG EMG Nerve conduction tests Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for Chediak-Higashi syndrome.  Bone marrow transplants  performed early in the disease appear to have been successful in several patients. Antibiotics are used to treat infections. Antiviral drugs, such as acyclovir, and chemotherapy drugs are often used in the accelerated phase of the disease. Blood and platelet transfusions are given as needed. Surgery may be needed to drain  abscesses  in some cases.  Support Groups 
 
 National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) --  rarediseases.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Death often occurs in the first 10 years of life, from chronic infections or accelerated disease that results in lymphoma-like illness. However, some affected children have survived longer. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Frequent infections, especially with EBV Lymphoma-like cancer Early death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have a family history of this disorder and you are planning to have children. Talk to your provider if your child shows symptoms of Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended before becoming pregnant if you have a family history of Chediak-Higashi. References 
 
 Introne WJ, Westbroek W, Golas GA, et al. Chediak-Higashi syndrome.  Gene Reviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington. 2015;2. PMID: 20301751.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301751 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Read More 
 
 Albinism 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Mononucleosis 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Nystagmus 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Immune System and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia