
 Chin augmentation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chin augmentation is surgery to reshape or enhance the size of the chin. It may be done either by inserting an implant or by moving or reshaping bones. Description 
 
 Surgery may be performed in the surgeon's office, a hospital, or an outpatient clinic. You will have x-rays taken of your face and chin. The surgeon will use these x-rays to find out what part of the chin to operate on. When you need only an implant to round out the chin: You may be under  general anesthesia  (asleep and pain-free). Or you may get medicine to numb the area, along with a medicine that will make you relaxed and sleepy. A cut is made, either inside the mouth or outside under the chin. A pocket is created in front of the chin bone and under the muscles. The implant is placed inside. The surgeon may use real bone or fat tissue, or an implant made out of silicone, Teflon™, Dacron, or newer biological inserts. The implant is usually attached to the bone with sutures or screws. Sutures are used to close the surgical cut. When the cut is inside the mouth, the scar can barely be seen.  The surgeon may also need to move some bones: You will likely be under general anesthesia. The surgeon will make a cut inside your mouth along the lower gum. This gives the surgeon access to the chin bone. The surgeon uses a bone saw or chisel to make a second cut through the jaw bone. The jaw bone is moved and wired or screwed in place. The cut is closed with stitches and a bandage is applied. Because the surgery is performed inside your mouth, you will not see any scars. The procedure takes between 1 and 3 hours.  Chin augmentation is commonly done at the same time as a nose job ( rhinoplasty ) or facial  liposuction  (when fat is removed from under the chin and neck). Surgery to correct bite problems can be done at the same time as chin surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Chin augmentation is usually done to balance the appearance of the face by making the chin longer or bigger compared to the nose. The best candidates for chin augmentation are people with weak or receding chins (microgenia), but who have a normal bite. Talk with a plastic surgeon if you are considering chin augmentation. Keep in mind that the desired result is improvement, not perfection. Risks 
 
 The most common complications of chin augmentation are: Bruising Movement of the implant Swelling  Other possible complications include: Damage to the teeth Loss of feeling  Rare side effects include: Blood clots Infection, sometimes the implant will have to be removed Pain that does not go away Numbness or other changes in feeling to the skin  Although most patients are happy with the outcome, poor cosmetic results that may need more surgery include: Wounds that do not heal well Scarring Unevenness of the face Fluid that collects under the skin Irregular skin shape (contour)  Smoking can delay healing. After the Procedure 
 
 You will feel some discomfort and soreness. Ask your doctor what kind of pain medicine you should use. You may feel some numbness in your chin for up to 3 months, and a stretching sensation around your chin for 1 week. Most of the swelling will be gone by 6 weeks, depending on the type of procedure you had. You might have to stick to a liquid or soft diet for at least a day or two. You will probably have the outside bandage removed within a week of surgery. You may be asked to wear a brace while you are sleeping for 4 to 6 weeks. You can resume light activity the day of surgery. You should be able to return to work and your usual activities within 7 to 10 days. Your health care provider will give you specific instructions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the cut was made under the chin, the scar should not be noticeable. Most implants last for a lifetime. Sometimes, implants made from bone or fat tissue that was taken from your body will be reabsorbed. Because you may have some swelling for months, you might not see the final appearance of your chin and jaw for 3 to 4 months. Alternative Names 
 
 Augmentation mentoplasty; Genioplasty Images 
 
 
 Chin augmentation  - series 
 References 
 
 Sykes JM, Frodel JL Jr. Mentoplasty. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al., eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Prosthesis 
 
 Review Date 2/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Hebe Molmenti, MD, PhD, private practice specializing in plastic and reconstructive surgery, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaw Injuries and Disorders 
 Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery 
 Browse the Encyclopedia