
 Chlamydia infections in women 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlamydia is an infection spread through sexual contact (STI). This means this infection is passed from one person to another during sexual contact. Causes 
 
 Chlamydia is caused by the bacteria  Chlamydia trachomatis.  Both males and females may have this infection. However, they may not have symptoms. As a result, you may become infected or pass the infection to your partner without knowing it. You are more likely to become infected with chlamydia if you have: Sex without using a condom Had multiple sexual partners Been infected with chlamydia before  Symptoms 
 
 Most women do not have symptoms. But some have: Burning when they urinate Pain in the lower part of the belly, possibly with fever Painful intercourse Vaginal discharge  or bleeding after intercourse  Exam and Tests 
 
 If you have symptoms of a chlamydia infection, your health care provider will collect a culture or perform a test called a nucleic acid amplification test. In the past, testing required a pelvic exam by a health care provider. Today, very accurate tests can be done on urine samples. Vaginal swabs, which a woman collects herself, can also be tested. Results take 1 to 2 days to come back. Your provider may also check you for other types of STIs. Most common STIs are: Gonorrhea HIV/AIDS Syphilis Hepatitis Herpes Even if you have no symptoms, you may need a chlamydia test if you: Are 25 years old or younger and are sexually active (get tested every year) Have a new sexual partner or more than one partner Treatment 
 
 Chlamydia can be treated with antibiotics. Some of these are safe to take if you are pregnant. Common side effects include: Nausea Upset stomach Diarrhea Both you and your partner need to take the antibiotics. Finish all of them, even if you feel better and still have some left. All of your sexual partners must take the antibiotics. Have them take the medicines even if they do not have symptoms. This will prevent you from passing the STIs back and forth. Gonorrhea often occurs with chlamydia. Therefore, treatment for gonorrhea is often given at the same time. Safe sex practices are needed to prevent becoming infected with chlamydia or spreading it to others. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Antibiotic treatment almost always works. You and your partner should take the medicines as directed. If chlamydia spreads into your uterus, it can cause scarring. Scarring can make it harder for you to get pregnant. You can help prevent this by: Finishing your antibiotics when you are treated Making sure your sexual partners also take antibiotics Talking to your provider about being tested for chlamydia and seeing your provider if you have symptoms Wearing condoms and practicing  safe sex When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of chlamydia. Alternative Names 
 
 Cervicitis - chlamydia; STI - chlamydia; STD - chlamydia; Sexually transmitted - chlamydia; PID - chlamydia; Pelvic inflammatory disease - chlamydia Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Uterus 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chlamydial infections in adolescents and adults. Updated June 4, 2015.  www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/chlamydia.htm . Accessed July 14, 2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for laboratory-based detection of  Chlamydia trachomatis  and  Neisseria gonorrhoeae , 2014.  MMWR  Recomm Rep . 2014;63(RR-02):1-19. PMID: 24622331.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24622331 . Geisler WM. Diagnosis and management of uncomplicated chlamydia trachomatis infections in adolescents and adults: summary of evidence reviewed for the 2015 centers for disease control and prevention sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines.  Clin Infect Dis . 2015;(61):774-84. PMID: 26602617.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26602617 . Geisler WM. Diseases caused by chlamydiae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 318. Hechtman L. Infertility, Female. In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.  Textbook of Natural Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 179. LeFevre ML; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for chlamydia and gonorrhea: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2014;161(12):902-910. PMID: 25243785.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25243785 . Workowski KA, Bolan GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Cervicitis 
 Chlamydia 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Infertility 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chlamydia Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia