
 Chlamydia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlamydia is an infection. It is caused by the bacteria  Chlamydia trachomatis . It is most often spread through sexual contact. Causes 
 
 Both males and females may have chlamydia. However, they may not have any symptoms. As a result, you may become infected or pass the infection to your partner without knowing it. You are more likely to become infected with chlamydia if you: Have sex without wearing a male or female condom Have more than one sexual partner Use drugs or alcohol and then have sex Symptoms 
 
 In men, chlamydia  may cause symptoms similar to  gonorrhea . Symptoms may include: Burning feeling during urination Discharge from the penis or rectum Tenderness  or pain in the testicles Rectal discharge or pain  Symptoms that may occur  in women  include: Burning feeling during urination Painful sexual intercourse Rectal pain or discharge Symptoms of pelvic inflammatory disease ( PID ),  salpingitis  (inflammation of the fallopian tubes), or liver inflammation similar to  hepatitis Vaginal discharge  or bleeding after intercourse Exams and Tests 
 
 If you have symptoms of a chlamydia infection, your health care provider will collect a culture or perform a test called a nucleic acid amplification test. In the past, testing required an exam by a provider. Today, very accurate tests can be done on urine samples. Results take 1 to 2 days to come back. Your provider may also check you for other types of sexually transmitted infection (STIs). Common STIs are gonorrhea, HIV, syphilis, hepatitis, and  herpes . Even if you have no symptoms, you may need a chlamydia test if you: Are 25 years old or younger and sexually active Have a new sexual partner or more than one partner Treatment 
 
 The usual treatment for chlamydia is antibiotics. Sexual partners must be treated. This will ensure that they do not pass the infection back and forth. A person may become infected with chlamydia many times. A follow-up evaluation may be done in 4 weeks to see if the infection has been cured. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Antibiotic treatment almost always works if you and your partner take the medicines as directed. If chlamydia spreads into your uterus, it can cause scarring. Scarring can make it harder for you to get pregnant. You can help prevent infection with chlamydia by: Finishing your antibiotics when you are treated Talking to your provider about being tested for chlamydia Going to see your provider if you have symptoms Wearing condoms and practicing  safe sex When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of chlamydia. Many people with chlamydia may not have symptoms. Therefore, sexually active adults should be screened once in a while for the infection. Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chlamydial infections in adolescents and adults. Updated June 4, 2015.  www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/chlamydia.htm . Accessed July 14, 2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for laboratory-based detection of  Chlamydia trachomatis  and  Neisseria gonorrhoeae --  2014.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2014;63(RR-02):1-19. PMID: 24622331.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24622331 . Geisler WM. Diseases caused by chlamydiae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 318. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for chlamydial infection: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2014;161(12):902-910. doi: 10.7325/M14-1981. Workowski KA, Bolan GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Chlamydia infections in women 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Epididymitis 
 Infertility 
 Orchitis 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 Penis 
 Psittacosis 
 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chlamydia Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia