
 Chloride test - blood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chloride is a type of  electrolyte . It works with other electrolytes such as potassium, sodium, and carbon dioxide (CO2). These substances help keep the proper balance of body fluids and maintain the body's acid-base balance. This article is about the laboratory test used to measure the amount of chloride in the fluid portion (serum) of the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may have this test if you have signs that your body's fluid level or acid-base balance is disturbed. This test is most often ordered with other blood tests, such as a basic or comprehensive metabolic panel. Normal Results 
 
 A typical normal range is 96 to 106 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) or 96 to 106 millimoles per liter (millimol/L). Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The example above shows the common measurement range for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A greater-than-normal level of chloride is called hyperchloremia. It may be due to: Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (used to treat glaucoma) Diarrhea Metabolic acidosis Respiratory alkalosis  (compensated) Renal tubular acidosis A lower-than-normal level of chloride is called hypochloremia. It may be due to: Addison disease Bartter syndrome Burns Congestive heart failure Dehydration Excessive sweating Hyperaldosteronism Metabolic alkalosis Respiratory acidosis  (compensated) Syndrome of inappropriate diuretic hormone secretion ( SIADH ) Vomiting  This test may also be done to help rule out or diagnose: Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II Primary hyperparathyroidism  Alternative Names 
 
 Serum chloride test Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Seifter JR. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Addison disease 
 Antidiuretic hormone blood test 
 Gastric suction 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hyperventilation 
 Ions 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis 
 Respiratory acidosis 
 Sodium blood test 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
 Browse the Encyclopedia