
 Chlorophyll 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlorophyll is the chemical that makes plants green. Chlorophyll poisoning occurs when someone swallows a large amount of this substance. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Chlorophyll can be harmful in large amounts. Where Found 
 
 Chlorophyll can be found in: Green plants Plant foods Some cosmetics Natural supplements  Other products may also contain chlorophyll. Symptoms 
 
 Chlorophyll is considered nonpoisonous. Most people who swallow chlorophyll have no symptoms. In rare cases, the following symptoms may occur: 
   Diarrhea
    
   Loose bowel movements (stools)
 
   Stomach cramps
    If someone does swallow chlorophyll, their tongue may appear yellow or black, and their urine or stool may appear green. If chlorophyll touches the skin, it may lead to mild burning or itching. Home Care 
 
 Do NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the substance  Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may not need to go to the emergency room, but if they do go, they may receive: Activated charcoal Medicines to treat symptoms Laxatives  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the amount of chlorophyll they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Recovery is very likely because chlorophyll is relatively nonpoisonous. References 
 
 Crinnion WJ. Environmental medicine. In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.  Textbook of Natural Medicine . 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2013:chap 35. Radbruch L. Antibiotics. In: Walsh D, Caraceni AT, Fainsinger R, et al, eds.  Palliative Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 131. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia