
 Choanal atresia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Choanal atresia is a narrowing or blockage of the nasal airway by tissue. It is a congenital condition, meaning it is present at birth. Causes 
 
 The cause of choanal atresia is unknown. It is thought to occur when the thin tissue separating the nose and mouth area during fetal development remains after birth. The condition is the most common nasal abnormality in newborn infants. Females get this condition about twice as often as males. More than half of affected infants also have other congenital problems. Choanal atresia is most often diagnosed shortly after birth while the infant is still in the hospital. Symptoms 
 
 Newborns generally prefer to breathe through their nose. Typically, infants only breathe through their mouths when they cry. Babies with choanal atresia have difficulty breathing unless they are crying. Choanal atresia may affect 1 or both sides of the nasal airway. Choanal atresia blocking both sides (bilateral) of the nose causes acute breathing problems with  cyanosis  (bluish discoloration) and breathing failure. Infants with bilateral choanal atresia may need  resuscitation  at delivery. More than half of infants have a blockage on only 1 side, which causes less severe problems. Symptoms include: Chest retracts unless the child is breathing through mouth or crying. Difficulty breathing  following birth, which may result in cyanosis (bluish discoloration), unless infant is crying. Inability to nurse and breathe at same time. Inability to pass a catheter through each side of the nose into the throat. Persistent one-sided nasal blockage or discharge. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show an obstruction of the nose. Tests that may be done include: CT scan Endoscopy  of the nose Sinus x-ray Treatment 
 
 The immediate concern is to resuscitate the baby if necessary. An airway may need to be placed so that the infant can breathe. In some cases,  intubation  or  tracheostomy  may be needed. An infant can learn to mouth breathe, which can delay the need for immediate surgery. Surgery to remove the obstruction cures the problem. Surgery may be delayed if the infant can tolerate mouth breathing. The surgery may be done through the nose (transnasal) or through the mouth (transpalatal). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Full recovery is expected. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications include: Aspiration  while feeding and attempting to breathe through the mouth Respiratory arrest Renarrowing of the area after surgery When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Choanal atresia, especially when it affects both sides, is generally diagnosed shortly after birth while the infant is still in the hospital. One-sided atresia may not cause symptoms, and the infant may be sent home without a diagnosis. If your infant has any of the problems listed here, consult your health care provider. The child may need to be checked by an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. References 
 
 Haddad J, Keesecker S. Congenital disorders of the nose. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 376. Read More 
 
 Aspiration 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia