
 Cholesteatoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholesteatoma is a type of skin  cyst  that is located in the middle ear and mastoid bone in the skull. Causes 
 
 Cholesteatoma can be a birth defect (congenital). It more commonly occurs as a result of  chronic ear infection . The eustachian tube helps equalize pressure in the middle ear. When it is not working well, negative pressure can build up and pull part of the eardrum (tympanic membrane) inward. This creates a pocket or cyst that fills with old skin cells and other waste material.  The cyst may become infected or get bigger. This can cause the breakdown of some of the middle ear bones or other structures of the ear. This can affect hearing, balance, and possibly the function of the facial muscles. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Dizziness Drainage from the ear , which can be chronic Hearing loss  in one ear Exams and Tests 
 
 An ear exam may show a pocket or opening (perforation) in the eardrum, often with drainage. A deposit of old skin cells may be seen with a microscope or an otoscope -- a special instrument to view the ear. Sometimes a group of blood vessels may be seen in the ear. The following tests may be performed to rule out other causes of dizziness: CT scan Electronystagmography Treatment 
 
 Cholesteatomas very often continue to grow if they are not removed. Surgery is most often successful. However, you may need the ear cleaned by a health care provider from time to time. Another surgery may be needed if the cholesteatoma comes back. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain abscess  (rare) Erosion  into the facial nerve (causing  facial paralysis ) Meningitis Spread of the cyst into the brain When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if ear pain, drainage from the ear, or other symptoms occur or worsen, or if hearing loss occurs. Prevention 
 
 Prompt and thorough treatment of chronic ear infection may help prevent cholesteatoma. Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic ear infection - cholesteatoma; Chronic otitis - cholesteatoma Images 
 
 
 Tympanic membrane 
 References 
 
 Chole RA. Chronic otitis media, mastoiditis, and petrositis. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 139. O'Handley JG, Tobin EJ, Shah AR. Otorhinolaryngology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Brain abscess 
 Chronic 
 Cyst 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Erosion 
 Facial paralysis 
 Labyrinthitis 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia