
 Cholestasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholestasis is any condition in which the flow of  bile  from the liver is slowed or blocked. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of cholestasis. Extrahepatic cholestasis occurs outside the liver. It can be caused by: 
   Bile duct tumors
    
   Cysts
    
   Narrowing of the bile duct (strictures)
    
   Stones in the common bile duct
    
   Pancreatitis
    
   Pancreatic tumor or pseudocyst
    
   Pressure on the bile ducts due to a nearby mass or tumor
    
   Primary sclerosing cholangitis
    Intrahepatic cholestasis occurs inside the liver. It can be caused by: 
   Alcoholic liver disease
    
   Amyloidosis
    
   Bacterial  abscess  in the liver
    
   Being fed exclusively through a vein (IV)
    
   Lymphoma
    
   Pregnancy
    Primary biliary cirrhosis Primary or  metastatic  liver cancer Primary sclerosing cholangitis Sarcoidosis 
   Serious infections that have spread through the bloodstream (sepsis)
    Tuberculosis Viral hepatitis  Certain medicines can also cause cholestasis, including: Antibiotics such as ampicillin and other penicillins Anabolic steroids Birth control pills Chlorpromazine Cimetidine Estradiol Imipramine Prochlorperazine Terbinafine Tolbutamide  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Clay-colored or white stools Dark urine Inability to digest certain foods Itching Nausea or vomiting Pain in the right upper part of the abdomen  Yellow skin or eyes Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests may show that you have elevated  bilirubin  and  alkaline phosphatase . Imaging tests are used to diagnose this condition. Tests include: CT scan of the abdomen MRI of the abdomen Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), can also determine cause Ultrasound of the abdomen Treatment 
 
 The underlying cause of cholestasis must be treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the disease causing the condition. Stones in the common bile duct can often be removed. This can cure the cholestasis. Stents can be placed to open areas of the common bile duct that are narrowed or blocked by cancers. If the condition is caused by the use of a certain medicine, it will often go away when you stop taking that drug. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Diarrhea Organ failure can occur if sepsis develops Poor absorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins Severe itching Weak bones (osteomalacia) due to having cholestasis for a very long time When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Itching that does not go away Yellow skin or eyes Other symptoms of cholestasis Prevention 
 
 Get vaccinated for hepatitis A and B if you are at risk. Do not use intravenous drugs and share needles.  Alternative Names 
 
 Intrahepatic cholestasis; Extrahepatic cholestasis Images 
 
 
 Gallstones 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Penman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 23. Beuers U, Boberg KM, Chapman RW, et al. EASL clinical practice guidelines: management of cholestatic liver diseases.  J Hepatol . 2009;51(2):237-267. PMID: 19501929  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19501929 . Eaton JE, Lindo KD. Primary biliary chirrhosis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 91. Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and liver. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia