
 Chromium in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chromium is an essential mineral that is not made by the body. It must be obtained from the diet. Function 
 
 Chromium is important in the  metabolism  of fats and  carbohydrates . It stimulates fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis, which are important for brain function and other body processes. Chromium also aids in insulin action and glucose metabolism. Food Sources 
 
 The best source of chromium is brewer's yeast. However, many people do not use brewer's yeast because it causes bloating ( abdominal distention ) and  nausea . Other good sources of chromium include the following: Beef Liver Eggs Chicken Oysters Wheat germ Potatoes  Black pepper, butter, and molasses are also good sources of chromium. Side Effects 
 
 Chromium deficiency may be seen as impaired glucose tolerance. It occurs in older people with  type 2 diabetes  and in infants with protein-calorie malnutrition. Taking chromium supplements can help manage these conditions. However, it is not a substitute for other treatment. Because of the low absorption and high excretion rates of chromium, toxicity is not common. Recommendations 
 
 The Food and Nutrition Board at the Institute of Medicine recommends the following dietary intake for chromium: Infants 0 to 6 months: 0.2 micrograms per day (mcg/day)* 7 to 12 months: 5.5 mcg/day*  Children 1 to 3 years: 11 mcg/day* 4 to 8 years: 15 mcg/day* Males age 9 to 13 years: 25 mcg/day* Females age 9 to 13 years: 21 mcg/day*  Adolescents and Adults Males age 14 to 50: 35 mcg/day* Males age 51 and over: 30 mcg/day* Females age 14 to 18: 24 mcg/day* Females age 19 to 50: 25 mcg/day* Females age 51 and older: 20 mcg/day* Pregnant females age 19 to 50: 30 mcg/day Lactating females age 19 to 50: 45 mcg/day  AI or Adequate Intake* The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods from the food guide plate. Specific recommendations depend on age, gender, and other factors (such as pregnancy). Women who are pregnant or producing breast milk (lactating) need higher amounts. Ask your health care provider which amount is best for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - chromium References 
 
 Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Read More 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 Metabolism 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Minerals 
 Browse the Encyclopedia