
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common lung disease. Having COPD makes it hard to breathe. There are two main forms of COPD: Chronic bronchitis, which involves a long-term cough with mucus Emphysema, which involves damage to the lungs over time  Most people with COPD have a combination of both conditions. Causes 
 
 Smoking is the main cause of COPD. The more a person smokes, the more likely that person will develop COPD. But some people smoke for years and never get COPD. In rare cases, nonsmokers who lack a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin can develop emphysema. Other risk factors for COPD are: Exposure to certain gases or fumes in the workplace Exposure to heavy amounts of secondhand smoke and pollution Frequent use of a cooking fire without proper ventilation  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Cough, with or without mucous Fatigue Many respiratory infections Shortness of breath ( dyspnea ) that gets worse with mild activity Trouble catching one's breath Wheezing  Because the symptoms develop slowly, some people may not know that they have COPD. Exams and Tests 
 
 The best test for COPD is a lung function test called  spirometry . This involves blowing out as hard as possible into a small machine that tests lung capacity. The results can be checked right away.  Using a stethoscope to listen to the lungs can also be helpful. But sometimes, the lungs sound normal, even when a person has COPD. Imaging tests of the lungs, such as  x-rays  and  CT scans , can be helpful. With an x-ray, the lungs may look normal, even when a person has COPD. A CT scan will usually show signs of COPD. Sometimes, a blood test called arterial blood gas may be done to measure the amounts of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for COPD. But there are many things you can do to relieve symptoms and keep the disease from getting worse. If you smoke, now is the time to quit. This is the best way to slow lung damage. Medicines used to treat COPD include: Inhalers (bronchodilators) COPD -- quick-relief drugs to help open the airways Inhaled COPD -- control drugs or oral steroids to reduce lung inflammation Anti-inflammatory drugs to reduce swelling in the airways Certain long-term antibiotics  In severe cases or during flare-ups, you may need to receive: Steroids by mouth or through a vein (intravenously) Bronchodilators through a  nebulizer Oxygen therapy Assistance from a machine to help breathing by using a mask,  BiPAP , or through the use of an endotracheal tube  Your health care provider may prescribe antibiotics during symptom  flare-ups , because an infection can make COPD worse. You may need  oxygen therapy  at home if you have a low level of oxygen in your blood. Pulmonary rehabilitation does not cure COPD. But it can teach you to breathe in a different way so you can stay active and feel better. LIVING WITH COPD You can do things every day to keep COPD from getting worse, protect your lungs, and stay healthy. Walk to build up strength: Ask the provider or therapist how far to walk. Slowly increase how far you walk. Avoid talking if you get short of breath when you walk. Use pursed lip breathing when you breathe out, to empty your lungs before the next breath.  Things you can do to make it easier for yourself around the home include: Avoid very cold air or very hot weather Make sure no one smokes in your home Reduce air pollution by not using the fireplace and getting rid of other irritants Manage stress in your mood Eat healthy foods, including fish, poultry, and lean meat, as well as fruits and vegetables. If it is hard to keep your weight up, talk to a provider or dietitian about eating foods with more calories. Surgery may be used to treat COPD. Only a few people benefit from these surgical treatments: Surgery to remove parts of the diseased lung, which can help less-diseased parts work better in some people with emphysema Lung transplant for a small number of very severe cases  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 COPD is a long-term (chronic) illness. The disease will get worse more quickly if you do not stop smoking. If you have severe COPD, you will be short of breath with most activities. You may be admitted to the hospital more often. Talk with your provider about breathing machines and end-of-life care as the disease progresses. Possible Complications 
 
 With COPD, you may have other health problems such as: Irregular heartbeat ( arrhythmia ) Need for breathing machine and oxygen therapy Right-sided heart failure or  cor pulmonale  (heart swelling and  heart failure  due to chronic lung disease) Pneumonia Pneumothorax Severe weight loss and malnutrition Thinning of the bones ( osteoporosis ) Debilitation Increased anxiety When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a rapid increase in  shortness of breath . Prevention 
 
 Not smoking prevents most COPD. Ask your provider about  quit-smoking  programs. Medicines are also available to help you stop smoking. Alternative Names 
 
 COPD; Chronic obstructive airways disease; Chronic obstructive lung disease; Chronic bronchitis; Emphysema; Bronchitis - chronic Images 
 
 
 Spirometry 
 Emphysema 
 Bronchitis 
 Quitting smoking 
 COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder) 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Anderson B, Conner K, Dunn C, et al. Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement. Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). 9th edition. Updated March 2013.  www.icsi.org/_asset/yw83gh/COPD.pdf . Accessed July 21, 2015. Celli BR, Zuwallack RL. Pulmonary rehabilitation. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 105. Criner GJ, Bourbeau J, Diekemper RL, et al. Prevention of acute exacerbations of COPD: American College of Chest Physicians and Canadian Thoracic Society Guideline.  Chest . 2015;147(4):894-942. PMID: 25321320  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25321320 . Han MK, Lazarus SC. COPD. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Dilated cardiomyopathy 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Lung disease 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Being active after your heart attack 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - adults - discharge 
 COPD - control drugs 
 COPD - quick-relief drugs 
 COPD - what to ask your doctor  
 How to breathe when you are short of breath 
 How to use a nebulizer 
 How to use an inhaler - no spacer 
 How to use an inhaler - with spacer 
 How to use your peak flow meter 
 Lung surgery - discharge  
 Make peak flow a habit! 
 Oxygen safety 
 Traveling with breathing problems 
 Using oxygen at home 
 Using oxygen at home - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 COPD 
 Browse the Encyclopedia