
 Chronic cholecystitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic cholecystitis is swelling and irritation of the gallbladder that continues over time. The gallbladder is a sac located under the liver. It stores bile that is made in the liver. Bile helps the intestines digest fats. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, chronic cholecystitis is caused by repeated attacks of acute (sudden) cholecystitis. Most of these attacks are caused by gallstones in the gallbladder. These attacks cause the walls of the gallbladder to thicken. The gallbladder begins to shrink. Over time, the gallbladder is less able to concentrate, store, and release bile. The disease occurs more often in women than in men. It is more common after age 40. Symptoms 
 
 Acute cholecystitis  is a painful condition that leads to chronic cholecystitis. It is not clear whether chronic cholecystitis causes any symptoms.  Symptoms of acute cholecystis can include: Sharp, cramping, or dull pain in upper right or upper middle of your belly Steady pain lasting about 30 minutes Pain that spreads to your back or below your right shoulder blade Clay-colored stools Fever Nausea and vomiting Yellowing of skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may order the following blood tests: Amylase  and lipase. To diagnose diseases of the pancreas. Complete blood count  (CBC) Liver function tests . To evaluate how well the liver is working.  Tests that reveal  gallstones  or inflammation in the gallbladder include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Gallbladder scan (HIDA scan) Oral cholecystogram  Treatment 
 
 Surgery is the most common treatment. Surgery to remove the gallbladder is called cholecystectomy. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is most often done. This surgery uses smaller surgical cuts, which result in a faster recovery. Many people are able to go home from the hospital on the same day as surgery, or the next morning. Open cholecystectomy requires a larger cut in the upper-right part of the abdomen. If you are too ill to have surgery because of other diseases or conditions, the gallstones may be dissolved with medicine you take by mouth. However, this may take 2 years or longer to work. The stones may return after treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Cholecystectomy is a common procedure with a low risk. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cancer  of the gallbladder (rarely) Jaundice Pancreatitis Worsening of the condition  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of cholecystitis. Prevention 
 
 The condition is not always preventable. Eating less fatty foods may relieve symptoms in people. However, the benefit of a low-fat diet has not been proven. Alternative Names 
 
 Cholecystitis - chronic Images 
 
 
 Cholecystitis, CT scan 
 Cholecystitis, cholangiogram 
 Cholecystolithiasis 
 Gallstones, cholangiogram 
 Cholecystogram 
 References 
 
 Wang DQH, Afdhal NH. Gallstone disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 65. Read More 
 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Bile 
 Cancer 
 Chronic 
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic - discharge 
 Gallbladder removal - open - discharge 
 Gallstones - discharge 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia