
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pancreatitis is swelling of the pancreas. Chronic pancreatitis is present when this problem does not heal or improve, gets worse over time, and leads to permanent damage. Causes 
 
 The pancreas is an organ located behind the stomach. It produces chemicals (called enzymes) needed to digest food. It also produces the hormones insulin and glucagon. When scarring of the pancreas occurs, the organ is no longer able to make the right amount of these enzymes. As a result, your body may be unable to digest fat and key elements of food. Damage to the parts of the pancreas that make insulin may lead to diabetes. The condition is most often caused by  alcohol abuse  over many years. Repeated episodes of acute pancreatitis can lead to chronic pancreatitis. Genetics may be a factor in some cases. Sometimes, the cause is not known. Other conditions that have been linked to chronic pancreatitis: Problems when the immune system attacks the body Blockage of the tubes (ducts) that drain enzymes from the pancreas  Cystic fibrosis High levels of a fat, called triglycerides, in the blood  Overactive parathyroid gland Use of certain medicines (especially sulfonamides, thiazides, and azathioprine) Chronic pancreatitis occurs more often in men than in women. The condition often develops in people ages 30 to 40. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: ABDOMINAL PAIN Greatest in the upper abdomen May last from hours to days; over time, may always be present. May get worse from eating or drinking May get worse from drinking alcohol May also be felt in the back  DIGESTIVE PROBLEMS  Chronic weight loss, even when eating habits and amounts are normal Diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting Fatty or oily stools Pale or clay-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to diagnose pancreatitis include: Fecal fat test Increased  serum amylase  level Increased  serum lipase  level Serum trypsinogen Tests that may show the cause of pancreatitis include: Serum IgG4 (for diagnosing autoimmune pancreatitis) Gene testing, most often done when other common causes are not present or there is a family history Imaging tests that can show swelling, scarring, or other changes of the pancreas may be seen on: CT scan of the abdomen Ultrasound of the abdomen Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) ERCP  is short for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. It is a procedure that looks at the bile ducts. It is done through an endoscope. Treatment 
 
 People with severe pain or who are losing weight may need to stay in the hospital for: Pain medicines Fluids given through a vein (IV) Stopping food or fluid by mouth to limit the activity of the pancreas, and then slowly starting an oral diet Inserting a tube through the nose or mouth to remove the contents of the stomach ( nasogastric suctioning ) may sometimes be done. The tube may stay in for 1 to 2 days, or sometimes for 1 to 2 weeks.  The right diet is important for people with chronic pancreatitis to keep a healthy weight and get the correct nutrients. A nutritionist can help you create a diet that includes: Drinking plenty of liquids Limiting fats Eating small, frequent meals (this helps reduce digestive symptoms) Getting enough vitamins and calcium in the diet, or as extra supplements Limiting caffeine  The health care provider may prescribe pancreatic enzymes. You must take these medicines with every meal. The enzymes will help you digest food better and gain weight. Avoid smoking and drinking alcoholic beverages, even if your pancreatitis is mild. Other treatments may involve: Pain medicines or a surgical nerve block to relieve pain Taking insulin to control  blood sugar (glucose)  level  Surgery may be recommended if a blockage is found. In severe cases, part or all of the pancreas may be removed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This is a serious disease that may lead to disability and death. You can reduce the risk by avoiding alcohol. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Ascites Blockage (obstruction) of the small intestine or  bile ducts Blood clot in the vein of the spleen Fluid collections in the pancreas ( pancreatic pseudocysts ) that may become infected Diabetes  Poor absorption  of fat, nutrients, and vitamins (most often the fat-soluble vitamins, A, D, E, or K)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of pancreatitis You have pancreatitis, and your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment Prevention 
 
 Determining the cause of  acute pancreatitis  and treating it quickly may help prevent chronic pancreatitis. Limiting the amount of alcohol you drink can reduce your risk of getting this condition.  Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic pancreatitis - chronic; Pancreatitis - chronic - discharge; Pancreatic insufficiency - chronic; Acute pancreatitis - chronic Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Pancreatitis, chronic - CT scan 
 References 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Fosmark CE. Chronic pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Ascites 
 Bile duct obstruction 
 Diabetes 
 Glucagon blood test 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Malabsorption 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pancreatitis - discharge 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia