
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is  cancer  that starts inside bone marrow. This is the soft tissue in the center of bones that helps form all blood cells. CML causes an uncontrolled growth of immature and mature cells that make a certain type of white blood cell called myeloid cells. The diseased cells build up in the bone marrow and blood. Causes 
 
 Cause of CML is related to an abnormal chromosome called the Philadelphia chromosome. Radiation exposure can increase the risk of developing CML. Radiation exposure can be from radiation treatments used in the past to treat thyroid cancer or Hodgkin lymphoma or from a nuclear disaster. It takes many years to develop leukemia from radiation exposure. Most people treated for cancer with radiation do not develop leukemia. And most people with CML have not been exposed to radiation. CML most often occurs in middle-age adults and in children. Symptoms 
 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia is grouped into phases: 
   Chronic
    
   Accelerated
    
   Blast crisis
    The chronic phase can last for months or years. The disease may have few or no symptoms during this time. Most people are diagnosed during this stage, when they have blood tests done for other reasons. The accelerated phase is a more dangerous phase. Leukemia cells grow more quickly. Common symptoms include  fever  (without infection),  bone pain , and a  swollen spleen . Untreated CML leads to the blast crisis phase. Bleeding and infection may occur due to bone marrow failure.  Other possible symptoms of a blast crisis include: Bruising Excessive sweating  (night sweats) Fatigue 
   Fever
    Pressure under the lower left ribs from a swollen spleen
    Rash - small pinpoint red marks on the skin ( petechiae ) Weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination often reveals a swollen spleen. A complete blood count ( CBC ) shows an increased number of white blood cells with many immature forms present and an increased number of platelets. These are parts of the blood that help blood clot. Other tests that may be done include: Bone marrow  biopsy Blood and bone marrow  testing  for the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome
    Platelet count Treatment 
 
 Medicines that target the abnormal protein made by the Philadelphia chromosome are often the first treatment for CML. These medicines can be taken as pills. Sometimes, chemotherapy is used first to reduce the white blood cell count if it is very high at diagnosis. The blast crisis phase is very difficult to treat. This is because there is a very high count of immature white blood cells (leukemia cells). The only known cure for CML is a  bone marrow transplant , or stem cell transplant. Most people, though, do not need a transplant because the targeted medicines are successful. Discuss your options with your oncologist. You and your health care provider may need to manage many other issues or concerns during your leukemia treatment, including: Managing your pets during chemotherapy Bleeding problems Eating enough calories when you are sick Swelling and pain in your mouth Safe eating during cancer treatment Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Targeted medicines have greatly improved the outlook for people with CML. When the signs and symptoms of CML go away and blood counts and bone marrow biopsy appear normal, the person is considered in remission. Most people can remain in remission for many years while on this medicine. Stem cell or bone marrow transplant is often considered in people whose disease comes back or gets worse while taking the initial medicines. Transplant may also be recommended for people who are diagnosed in accelerated phase or blast crisis. Possible Complications 
 
 Blast crisis can lead to complications, including infection, bleeding, fatigue, unexplained fever, and kidney problems. Chemotherapy can have serious side effects, depending on the drugs used. Prevention 
 
 Avoid exposure to radiation when possible. Alternative Names 
 
 CML; Chronic myeloid leukemia; Chronic granulocytic leukemia; Leukemia - chronic granulocytic Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Auer rods 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia - microscopic view 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Chronic myeloid leukemia. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, et al, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 101. National Cancer Institute: PDQ chronic myelogenous leukemia treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated March 9, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/CML/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: chronic myelogenous leukemia. Version 1.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cml.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Cancer 
 Peripheral 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia