
 Claw hand 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Claw hand is a condition that causes curved or bent fingers. This makes the hand appear like the claw of an animal. Considerations 
 
 Someone can be born with claw hand (congenital), or they can develop it because of certain disorders, such as nerve injury. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Congenital abnormality, such as from  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Nerve damage  in the arm Scarring after a severe burn of the hand or forearm  Rare infections, such as  leprosy When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If the condition is congenital, it is usually diagnosed at birth.  If you notice claw hand developing, contact your health care provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you and look closely at your hands and feet. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms.  The following tests may be done to check for nerve damage:  Electromyography ( EMG ) to check the health of the muscles and the nerves that control the muscles Nerve conduction studies  to check how fast electrical signals move through a nerve Treatment depends on the cause. It may include: Splinting Surgery to fix problems that may be contributing to the claw hand, such as nerve or tendon problems,  joint contractures , or scar tissue Therapy to straighten the fingers Alternative Names 
 
 Ulnar nerve palsy - claw hand; Ulnar nerve dysfunction - claw hand; Ulnar claw Images 
 
 
 Claw hand 
 References 
 
 Davis TRC. Principles of tendon transfers of median, radial and ulnar nerves. In: Wolfe SW, Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, Kozin SH, Cohen MS, eds.  Green's Operative Hand Surgery . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 31. Sapienza A, Green S. Correction of the claw hand.  Hand Clin . 2012;28(1):53-66. PMID: 22117924  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22117924 . Read More 
 
 Claw foot 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Finger Injuries and Disorders 
 Hand Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia