
 CMV retinitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis is a viral infection of the retina of the eye resulting in inflammation. Causes 
 
 CMV retinitis is caused by a member of a group of herpes-type viruses. Infection with CMV is very common. Most people are exposed to CMV in their lifetime, but typically only those with weakened immune systems become ill from CMV infection. Serious CMV infections can occur in people who have weakened immune systems as a result of: HIV/AIDS Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy Drugs that suppress the immune system Organ transplant Symptoms 
 
 Some people with CMV retinitis have no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they may include: Blind spots Blurred vision  and other vision problems Floaters Retinitis usually begins in 1 eye, but often progresses to the other eye. Without treatment, damage to the retina can lead to blindness in 4 to 6 months or less. Exams and Tests 
 
 CMV retinitis is diagnosed through an ophthalmologic exam. Dilation of the pupils and  ophthalmoscopy  will show signs of CMV retinitis. CMV infection can be diagnosed with blood or urine tests that look for substances specific to the infection. A tissue  biopsy  can detect the viral infection and presence of CMV virus particles, but this is rarely done. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to stabilize or restore vision and prevent blindness. Long-term treatment is often needed. Medicines may be given by mouth (orally), through a vein (intravenously), or injected directly into the eye (intraviteously). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Even with treatment, the disease can worsen to blindness. This progression may be because the virus becomes resistant to the antiviral drugs so that the drugs are no longer effective, or because the person's immune system has deteriorated further. CMV retinitis may also lead to  retinal detachment , in which the retina detaches from the back of the eye, causing blindness. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Kidney impairment (from drugs used to treat the condition) Low  white blood cell count  (from drugs used to treat the condition) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If symptoms worsen or do not improve with treatment, or if new symptoms develop, call your health care provider. People with HIV/AIDS (especially those with a very low CD4 count) who have vision problems should make an appointment right away for an eye exam. Prevention 
 
 A CMV infection usually only causes symptoms in people with a weakened immune system. Certain medicines (like cancer therapy) and diseases (such as HIV/AIDS) can cause a weakened immune system.  People with AIDS who have a CD4 count of less than 250 cells/microliter or 250 cells/cubic millimeter should be examined regularly for this condition, even if they do not have symptoms. If you had CMV retinitis in the past, ask your provider if you need treatment to prevent its return. Alternative Names 
 
 Cytomegalovirus retinitis Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 CMV retinitis 
 CMV (cytomegalovirus) 
 References 
 
 Crumpacker CS. Cytomegalovirus (CMV). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 140. Zamir E. Ocular infections with cytomegalovirus (CMV). In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 7.5. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Immune response 
 Retinal detachment 
 Systemic 
 WBC count 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cytomegalovirus Infections 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia