
 CMV - gastroenteritis/colitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 CMV gastroenteritis/colitis is inflammation of the stomach or intestine due to infection with cytomegalovirus (CMV). This same virus can also cause: Lung infection Infection at the back of the eye Infections of a baby while still in the womb Causes 
 
 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a herpes-type virus. It is related to the virus that causes chickenpox.  Infection with CMV is very common. It is spread by saliva, urine, respiratory droplets, sexual contact, and blood transfusions. Most people are exposed at some point, but most of the time, the virus produces mild or no symptoms in healthy people. Serious CMV infections can occur in people with weakened immune systems due to: AIDS Chemotherapy treatment for cancer During or after bone marrow or organ transplant Ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease Rarely, serious CMV infection involving the GI tract has occurred in people with a healthy immune system. Symptoms 
 
 Gastrointestinal CMV disease may affect one area or the entire body.  Ulcers  can occur in the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, or colon. These ulcers are associated with symptoms such as: Abdominal pain Difficulty swallowing or pain with swallowing Nausea Vomiting When the intestines are involved, the ulcers may cause: Abdominal pain Bloody stools Diarrhea Fever Weight loss More severe infections can result in  gastrointestinal bleeding  or a hole through the wall of the bowel. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Barium enema Colonoscopy Upper endoscopy  (EGD)
    Stool culture  to rule out other causes of infection Upper GI and small bowel series Laboratory tests will be done on a sample of tissue taken from your stomach or intestine. The tests, such as a  gastric or intestinal tissue culture  or biopsy, determine if the virus is in the tissue. A  CMV serology test  is done to look for antibodies to the CMV virus in your blood. Another blood test that looks for the presence and number of virus particles in the blood can also be done. Treatment 
 
 Treatment is meant to control the infection and relieve symptoms. Medicines to fight the virus (antiviral medicines) are prescribed. The medicines may be given through a vein (IV), and sometimes by mouth, for several weeks. The most commonly used medicines are ganciclovir and valganciclovir. In some cases, long-term therapy may be needed. A medicine called CMV hyperimmune globulin may be used when other drugs don't work. Other medicines may include: Drugs to prevent or reduce diarrhea Painkillers (analgesics)  Nutritional supplements or nutrition given through a vein (IV) may be used to treat muscle loss due to the disease. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In people with a healthy immune system, symptoms go away without treatment in most cases. Symptoms are more severe in those with a weakened immune system. The outcome depends on how severe the immune system deficiency and the CMV infection are. People with AIDS may have a worse outcome than those with a weakened immune system due to another reason.  CMV infection typically affects the entire body, even if only gastrointestinal symptoms are present. How well a person does depends on how well the antiviral drugs work. Possible Complications 
 
 The drugs used to fight the virus may cause side effects. The type of side effect depends on the specific drug used. For example, the drug ganciclovir may lower your white blood cell count. Another drug, foscarnet, may lead to kidney problems. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of CMV gastroenteritis/colitis. Prevention 
 
 There is a high risk of CMV infection in people who receive an organ transplant from a CMV-positive donor. Taking the antiviral drugs ganciclovir (Cytovene) and valganciclovir (Valcyte) by mouth before the transplant can lower your chance of getting a new infection or reactivating an old infection. People with AIDS who are effectively treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy are much less likely to get a CMV infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Colitis - cytomegalovirus; Gastroenteritis - cytomegalovirus; Gastrointestinal CMV disease Images 
 
 
 Gastrointestinal anatomy 
 Stomach and stomach lining 
 CMV (cytomegalovirus) 
 References 
 
 Crumpacker CS. Cytomegalovirus. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 140. Majhail NS, Weisdorf DJ. Gastrointestinal and hepatic complications of solid organ and hematopoietic cell transplantation. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Wilcox GM. Gastrointestinal consequences of infection with human immunodeficiency virus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 34. Read More 
 
 Chemotherapy 
 Colitis 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Ulcers 
 Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) 
 WBC count 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cytomegalovirus Infections 
 Gastroenteritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia