
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis is a lung disease that results from breathing in dust from coal, graphite, or man-made carbon over a long time. Causes 
 
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis occurs in two forms: simple and complicated (also called progressive massive fibrosis, or PMF). Your risk of developing coal worker's pneumoconiosis depends on how long you have been around coal dust. Most people with this disease are older than 50. Smoking does not increase your risk of developing this disease, but it may have an added harmful effect on the lungs. If coal worker's pneumoconiosis occurs with  rheumatoid arthritis , it is called  Caplan syndrome . Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of this condition include: Cough Shortness of breath Coughing up of black sputum Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will do a physical exam and listen to your lungs with a stethoscope. A  chest x-ray  or  chest CT scan  will be performed. You will also likely need lung function tests. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include any of the following, depending on how severe your symptoms are: Medicines to keep the airways open and reduce mucus Pulmonary rehabilitation to help you learn ways to breathe better Oxygen therapy You should also avoid further exposure to coal dust. Support Groups 
 
 Ask your health care provider about Black Lung Clinics in your area. Information can be found at the National Coalition of Black Lung and Respiratory Disease Clinics website:  blacklungcoalition.org/clinics . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome for the simple form is usually good. It rarely causes disability or death. The complicated form may cause shortness of breath that worsens over time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Chronic  bronchitis Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD) Cor pulmonale  (failure of the right side of the heart) Respiratory failure Prevention 
 
 Wear a protective mask when working around coal, graphite, or man-made carbon. Companies should enforce the maximum permitted dust levels. Avoid smoking. Alternative Names 
 
 Black lung disease; Pneumoconiosis; Anthrosilicosis Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Coal worker's lungs - chest x-ray 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Cowie RL, Becklake MR. Pneumoconioses. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 73. Tarlo SM. Occupational lung disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Interstitial Lung Diseases 
 Lung Diseases 
 Occupational Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia