
 Cobalt poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cobalt is a naturally occurring element in the earth's crust. It is a very small part of our environment and very small amounts are needed for many animals and humans to stay healthy. Cobalt poisoning can occur when you are exposed to large amounts of cobalt. There are three basic ways that cobalt can cause poisoning. You can swallow too much of it, breathe too much into your lungs, or have it come in constant contact with your skin. Recently, cobalt poisoning has been seen from the wear and tear of some cobalt/chromium metal-on-metal hip implants. This type of implant is an artificial hip socket that is created by fitting a metal ball into a metal cup. Sometimes, metal particles (cobalt) are released as the metal ball grinds against the metal cup when you walk. These metal particles (ions) can get released into the hip socket and sometimes the bloodstream, causing cobalt toxicity. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.  Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Cobalt Where Found 
 
 Cobalt is a component of vitamin B12, an essential vitamin. Cobalt may also be found in: Alloys Batteries Chemistry/crystal sets Drill bits and machine tools Dyes and pigments (Cobalt Blue) Magnets Some metal-on-metal hip implants Tires  Cobalt was once used as a stabilizer in beer foam. It caused a condition called "beer-drinker's heart," which resulted in heart muscle weakness. This list may not be all-inclusive.  Symptoms 
 
 Usually you have to be exposed to high levels of cobalt for weeks to months to have symptoms. However, it is possible to have some symptoms if you swallow a large amount of cobalt at once. The most worrisome form of cobalt poisoning occurs when you breathe too much into your lungs. This usually will only happen in industrial settings where large amounts of drilling, polishing, or other processes release fine particles containing cobalt into the air. Breathing in this cobalt dust can cause a lot of chronic lung problems. If you breathe in this substance for long periods, you will likely develop breathing problems that are similar to asthma or pulmonary fibrosis. Cobalt poisoning that occurs from constant contact with your skin will likely cause irritation and rashes that go away slowly. Swallowing a large amount of absorbable cobalt at one time is very rare and is likely not very dangerous. It may cause nausea and vomiting. However, absorbing a large amount of cobalt over longer periods of time can lead to serious health problems, such as: Cardiomyopathy (a problem where your heart becomes big and floppy and has problems pumping blood) Deafness Nerve problems Ringing in the ears (tinnitus) Thickening of the blood Thyroid problems  Home Care 
 
 If you or someone you know has been exposed to cobalt, the first step is to leave the area and get fresh air. If cobalt came in contact with the skin, wash the area thoroughly. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 If possible, determine the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 If you swallowed a large amount of cobalt or you are starting to feel sick from long-term exposure, you may go to an emergency room. Treatment for skin contact : Since these rashes are rarely serious, very little will be done. The area may be washed and a skin cream may be prescribed. Treatment for lung involvement : Breathing problems will be treated based on your symptoms. Breathing treatments and medications to treat swelling and inflammation in your lungs may be prescribed. X-rays and EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) may be done. Treatment for swallowed cobalt : The health care team will treat your symptoms and order some blood tests. X-rays and EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) may be performed. In the rare case that you have large levels of cobalt in your blood, you may have hemodialysis and get medications (antidotes) to reverse the effects of the poison. Treatment for signs of cobalt toxicity from a metal-on-metal hip implant may include removing the implant and replacing it with a traditional hip implant.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who get sick from being exposed to large amounts of cobalt on one single occasion usually recover and have no long-term complications. The symptoms and problems associated with long-term cobalt poisoning are rarely reversible. People who have such poisoning will likely have to take medicine for the rest of their life to control the symptoms.  Alternative Names 
 
 Cobalt chloride; Cobalt oxide; Cobalt sulfate References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Hall AH, Shannon MW. Other heavy metals. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 75. 
 Review Date 1/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia