
 Coccidioides complement fixation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Coccidioides complement fixation is a blood test that looks for antibodies to the fungus  Coccidioides immitis.  This fungus causes the disease coccidioidomycosis. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample is needed . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation for the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to detect infection with the fungus that causes  coccidioidomycosis  or valley fever. This condition can cause lung or widespread (disseminated) infection. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means no  Coccidioides immitis  antibodies  are detected in the blood sample. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results mean that  Coccidioides immitis  antibodies are present. This can mean that you have a current or recent infection. The test may be repeated after several weeks to detect a rise in  titer  (antibody concentration), which confirms an active infection. In general, the worse the infection, the higher is the titer, except in people with a weakened immune system. There can be false positive tests in people with other fungal diseases such as  histoplasmosis  and  blastomycosis , and false negative tests in people with single lung masses from coccidioidomycosis. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Coccidioides antibody test Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis ( Coccidioides species ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 267. Iwen PC. Mycotic diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 61. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Titer 
 Valley fever 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Valley Fever 
 Browse the Encyclopedia