
 Colitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Colitis is swelling (inflammation) of the large intestine (colon). Causes 
 
 Causes of colitis include: Infections, including those caused by a virus, parasite, and  food poisoning  due to bacteria Ulcerative colitis  and  Crohn disease Lack of blood flow (ischemic colitis) Past radiation to the large bowel Necrotizing enterocolitis  in newborns Pseudomembranous colitis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can include: Abdominal pain  and  bloating  that may be constant, or come and go Bloody stools Chills Constant urge to have a bowel movement Dehydration Diarrhea Fever  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. You will also be asked questions about your symptoms such as:  How long have you had the symptoms? How severe is your pain? How often do you have pain and how long does it last? How often do you have diarrhea? Have you been traveling?  The provider can diagnose colitis by inserting a flexible tube into the rectum (flexible  sigmoidoscopy  or  colonoscopy ) and looking at certain areas of the colon. You may have biopsies taken during this exam. Biopsies may show changes related to inflammation. This can help determine the cause of colitis. Other studies that can identify colitis include: CT scan of the abdomen MRI of the abdomen Barium enema Treatment 
 
 Your treatment will depend on the cause of the disease.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook will vary, depending on the cause of the problem. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding  Hole in the colon Toxic megacolon Sore (ulceration) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms such as: Abdominal pain that does not get better Blood in the stool or stools that look black Diarrhea or vomiting that does not go away Swollen abdomen Images 
 
 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 Large intestine 
 References 
 
 Horn AE, Ufbert JW. Appendicitis, diverticulitis, and colitis.  Emerg Med Clin N Am . 2011;29:347-368. PMID: 21515183  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21515183 . Osterman MT, Lichtenstein GR. Ulcerative colitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 116. Wald A. Other diseases of the colon and rectum. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 128. Read More 
 
 Crohn disease 
 Cryptosporidium enteritis 
 Necrotizing enterocolitis 
 Pseudomembranous colitis 
 Toxic megacolon 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia