
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A collapsed lung occurs when air escapes from the lung. The air then fills the space outside of the lung, between the lung and chest wall. This buildup of air puts pressure on the lung, so it cannot expand as much as it normally does when you take a breath. The medical name of this condition is pneumothorax. Causes 
 
 Collapsed lung can be caused by an injury to the lung. Injuries can include a gunshot or knife wound to the chest, rib fracture, or certain medical procedures. In some cases, a collapsed lung is caused by air blisters (blebs) that break open, sending air into the space around the lung. This can result from air pressure changes such as when scuba diving or traveling to a high altitude. Tall, thin people and smokers are more at risk for a collapsed lung. Lung diseases can also increase the chance of getting a collapsed lung. These include: Asthma Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Cystic fibrosis Tuberculosis Whooping cough In some cases, a collapsed lung occurs without any cause. This is called a spontaneous collapsed lung.
 Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of a collapsed lung include: Sharp  chest or shoulder pain , made worse by a deep breath or a cough Shortness of breath Nasal flaring A larger pneumothorax causes more severe symptoms, including: Bluish color  of the skin due to lack of oxygen Chest tightness Lightheadedness and near fainting Easy fatigue Rapid heart rate Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen to your breathing with a stethoscope. If you have a collapsed lung, there are decreased breath sounds or no breath sounds on the affected side. You may also have low blood pressure. Tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gases  and other blood tests Chest x-ray CT scan  if other injuries or conditions are suspected Electrocardiogram Treatment 
 
 A small pneumothorax may go away on its own over time. You may only need oxygen treatment and rest.  The provider may use a needle to allow the air to escape from around the lung so it can expand more fully. You may be allowed to go home if you live near the hospital. If you have a large pneumothorax, a  chest tube  will be placed between the ribs into the space around the lungs to help drain the air and allow the lung to re-expand. The chest tube may be left in place for several days and you may need to stay in the hospital. If a small chest tube or flutter valve is used, you may be able to go home. You will need to return to the hospital to have the tube or valve removed. Some people with a collapsed lung need extra oxygen. Lung surgery  may be needed to treat collapsed lung or to prevent future episodes. The area where the leak occurred may be repaired. Sometimes, a special chemical is placed into the area of the collapsed lung. This chemical causes a scar to form. This procedure is called pleurodesis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If you have a collapsed lung, you are more likely to have another one in the future if you: Are tall and thin Continue to smoke Have had two collapsed lungs in the past How well you do after having a collapsed lung depends on what caused it. Possible Complications 
 
 Another collapsed lung in the future Shock , if there are serious injuries or infection, severe inflammation, or fluid in the lung develops When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of a collapsed lung, especially if you have had one before. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent a collapsed lung. Following standard procedure can reduce the risk of a pneumothorax when scuba diving. You can decrease your risk by not smoking. Alternative Names 
 
 Air around the lung; Air outside the lung; Pneumothorax dropped lung; Spontaneous pneumothorax Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Aortic rupture, chest x-ray 
 Pneumothorax - chest x-ray 
 Respiratory system 
 Chest tube insertion - series 
 Pneumothorax  - series 
 References 
 
 Byyny RL, Shockley LW. Scuba diving and dysbarism. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 143. Eckstein M, Henderson SO. Thoracic trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 45. Light RW, Lee YCG. Pneumothorax, chylothorax, hemothorax, and fibrothorax. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 81. Read More 
 
 Asthma 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Pertussis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Collapsed Lung 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia