
 Colposcopy - directed biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A colposcopy is a special way of looking at the cervix. It uses a light and a low-powered microscope to make the cervix appear much larger. This helps your health care provider find and then  biopsy  abnormal areas in your cervix. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will lie on a table and place your feet in stirrups, just like you would do for a pelvic exam. The provider will place an instrument (called a speculum) into your  vagina . This allows your provider to better see the cervix.  The cervix and vagina are gently swabbed with a vinegar or iodine solution. This removes the mucus that covers the surface and highlights abnormal areas.  The provider will place the colposcope at the opening of the vagina and examine the area. Photographs may be taken. The colposcope does not touch you. If any areas look abnormal, a small sample of the tissue will be removed using small biopsy tools. Many samples may be taken. Sometimes a tissue sample from inside the cervix is removed. This is called endocervical curettage (ECC). How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. You may be more comfortable if you empty your bladder and bowel before the procedure. Before the exam: DO NOT douche (this is never recommended). DO NOT place any products into the vagina. DO NOT have sex for 24 hours before the exam. Tell your provider if you are pregnant or could be pregnant  This test should not be done during a heavy period, unless it is abnormal. Keep your appointment if you are: At the very end or beginning of your regular period Having abnormal bleeding  You may be able to take ibuprofen or acetaminophen (Tylenol) before the colposcopy. Ask your provider if this is ok, and when and how much you should take. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have some discomfort when the speculum is placed inside the vagina. It may be more uncomfortable than a regular  Pap test . Some women feel a slight sting from the cleansing solution. You may feel a pinch or cramp each time a tissue sample is taken. You may have some cramping or slight bleeding after the biopsy. Heavy bleeding is unusual; if you have bleeding that soaks a pad in an hour, call your provider. DO NOT use tampons or put anything in the vagina for several days after a biopsy.  Some women may hold their breath during pelvic procedures because they expect pain. Slow, regular breathing will help you relax and relieve pain. Ask your provider about bringing a support person with you if that will help. You may have some bleeding after the biopsy, for up to 1 week. You should not douche, place tampons or creams into the vagina, or have sex for up to a week afterward. Ask your provider how long you should wait. You can use sanitary pads.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Colposcopy is done to detect cervical cancer and changes that may lead to cervical cancer. It is most often done when you have had an abnormal Pap smear. It may also be recommended if you have bleeding after sexual intercourse. Colposcopy may also be done when your provider sees abnormal areas on your cervix during a pelvic exam. These may include: Any abnormal growth on the cervix, or elsewhere in the vagina Genital warts  or HPV Irritation or inflammation of the cervix ( cervicitis ) The colposcopy may be used to keep track of HPV, and to look for abnormal changes that can come back after treatment. Normal Results 
 
 A smooth, pink surface of the cervix is normal. If the colposcopy or biopsy does not show why the Pap smear was abnormal, your provider may suggest that you have a cold knife cone biopsy. A specialist called a pathologist will examine the tissue sample from the cervical biopsy and send a report to your doctor. Biopsy results most often take 1 to 2 weeks. A normal result means there is no cancer and no abnormal changes were seen. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Your provider should be able to tell you if anything abnormal was seen during the test, including: Abnormal patterns in the blood vessels Areas that are swollen, worn away, or wasted away (atrophic) Cervical polyps Genital warts Whitish patches on the cervix  Abnormal biopsy results may be due to changes that can lead to cervical cancer. These changes are called dysplasia, or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN).  CIN I is mild CIN II is moderate CIN III is severe dysplasia or very early cervical cancer called carcinoma in situ  Abnormal biopsy results may be due to: Cervical cancer Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia  (precancerous tissue changes that are also called cervical dysplasia) Cervical warts (infection with  human papilloma virus , or HPV)  If the biopsy does not determine the cause of abnormal results, you may need a procedure called a cold knife cone biopsy. Risks 
 
 After the biopsy, you may have some bleeding for up to a week. You may have mild cramping, your vagina may feel sore, and you may have a dark discharge for 1 to 3 days. A colposcopy and biopsy will not make it more difficult for you to become pregnant, or cause problems during pregnancy. Call your provider if: Bleeding is very heavy or lasts for longer than 2 weeks. You have pain in your belly or in the pelvic area. You notice any signs of infection (fever, foul odor, or discharge).  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - colposcopy - directed; Biopsy - cervix - colposcopy; Endocervical curettage; ECC; Cervical punch biopsy; Biopsy - cervical punch; Cervical biopsy; Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia - colposcopy; CIN - colposcopy; Precancerous changes of the cervix - colposcopy; Cervical cancer - colposcopy; Squamous intraepithelial lesion - colposcopy; LSIL - colposcopy; HSIL - colposcopy; Low-grade colposcopy; High-grade colposcopy; Carcinoma in situ - colposcopy; CIS - colposcopy; ASCUS - colposcopy; Atypical glandular cells - colposcopy; AGUS - colposcopy; Atypical squamous cells - colposcopy; Pap smear - colposcopy; HPV - colposcopy; Human papilloma virus - colposcopy; Cervix - colposcopy; Colposcopy Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Colposcopy-directed biopsy 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice bulletin no. 140: management of abnormal cervical cancer screening test results and cervical cancer precursors.  Obstet Gynecol . 2013;122(6):1338-1367. PMID: 24264713  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24264713 . American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee opinion no. 463: cervical cancer in adolescents: screening, evaluation, and management.  Obstet Gynecol . 2010;116(2 Pt 1):469-472. PMID: 20664421  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20664421 . Beard JM, Osborn J. Common office procedures In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 28. Newkirk GR. Colposcopic examination. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 137. Noller KL. Intraepithelial neoplasia of the lower genital tract (cervix, vulva). In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Biopsy 
 Cancer 
 Cervical cancer 
 Cervical dysplasia 
 Genital warts 
 Pap test 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Cervical Cancer 
 Cervical Cancer Screening 
 Cervix Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia