
 Common cold 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The common cold most often causes a runny nose, nasal congestion, and sneezing. You may also have a sore throat, cough, headache, or other symptoms. Causes 
 
 It is called the common cold for good reason. There are over  one billion  colds in the United States each year. You and your children will probably have more colds than any other type of illness. Colds are the most common reason that children miss school and parents miss work. Parents often get colds from their children. Children can get many colds every year. They usually get them from other children. A cold can spread quickly through schools or daycares. Colds can occur at any time of the year, but they are most common in the winter or rainy seasons. A cold virus spreads through tiny, air droplets that are released when the sick person sneezes, coughs, or blows their nose. You can catch a cold if: A person with a cold sneezes, coughs, or blows their nose near you You touch your nose, eyes, or mouth after you have touched something contaminated by the virus, such as a toy or doorknob.  People are most contagious for the first 2 to 3 days of a cold. A cold is most often not contagious after the first week. Symptoms 
 
 Cold symptoms usually start about 2 or 3 days after you came in contact with the virus, although it could take up to a week. Symptoms mostly affect the nose. The most common cold symptoms are: Nasal congestion Runny nose Scratchy throat Sneezing Adults and older children with colds generally have a low fever or no fever. Young children often run a fever around 100 to 102°F (37.7 to 38.8°C). Depending on which virus caused your cold, you may also have: Cough Decreased appetite Headache Muscle aches Postnasal drip Sore throat  Treatment 
 
 Most colds go away in a few days. Some things you can do to  take care of yourself  with a cold include:  Get plenty of rest and drink fluids. Over-the-counter cold and cough medicines may help ease symptoms in adults and older children. They do not make your cold go away faster, but can help you feel better. Over-the-counter (OTC) cough and cold medicines are not recommended for children under age 4. Antibiotics should not be used to treat a common cold. Many alternative treatments have been tried for colds, such as vitamin C, zinc supplements, and echinacea. Talk to your health care provider before trying any herbs or supplements.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The fluid from your runny nose will become thicker and may turn yellow or green within a few days. This is normal, and not a reason for antibiotics. Most cold symptoms go away within a week in most cases. If you still feel sick after 7 days, see your provider to rule out a sinus infection, allergies, or other medical problem. Possible Complications 
 
 Colds are the most common trigger of wheezing in children with asthma. A cold may also lead to: Bronchitis Ear infection Pneumonia Sinusitis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Try treating your cold at home first. Call your health care provider if: You have problems breathing.
   Your symptoms get worse or do not improve after 7 to 10 days.
   Prevention 
 
 To lower your chances of getting sick:  Always wash your hands. Children and adults should wash hands after nose-wiping, diapering, and using the bathroom, and before eating and preparing food. Disinfect your environment. Clean commonly touched surfaces (such as sink handles, door knobs, and sleeping mats) with an EPA-approved disinfectant. Choose smaller daycare classes for your children. Use instant hand sanitizers to stop the spread of germs. Use paper towels instead of sharing cloth towels.  The immune system helps your body fight off infection. Here are ways to support the immune system:  Avoid secondhand smoke. It is responsible for many health problems, including colds. DO NOT use antibiotics if they are not needed. Breastfeed infants if possible. Breast milk is known to protect against respiratory tract infections in children, even years after you stop breastfeeding. Drink plenty of fluids to help your immune system work properly. Eat yogurt that contains "active cultures." These may help prevent colds. Probiotics may help prevent colds in children. Get enough sleep.  Alternative Names 
 
 Upper respiratory infection - viral; Cold Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Cold symptoms 
 Antibodies 
 Cold remedies 
 References 
 
 Fashner J, Ericson K, Werner S. Treatment of the common cold in children and adults.  Am Fam Physician . 2012;86(2):153-9. PMID: 22962927  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22962927 .  Singh M, Das RR. Zinc for the common cold.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2013, Issue 6. Art. No.: CD001364. PMID: 23775705  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23775705 .  Turner RB. The common cold. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 369. Read More 
 
 Bronchitis - acute 
 Otitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Sinusitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Common Cold 
 Browse the Encyclopedia