
 Complex regional pain syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain condition that can affect any area of the body, but often affects an arm or a leg. Causes 
 
 Doctors are not sure what causes CRPS. In some cases, the sympathetic nervous system plays an important role in the pain. Another theory is that CRPS is caused by a triggering of the immune response, which leads to the inflammatory symptoms of redness, warmth, and swelling in the affected area. CRPS has 2 forms: CRPS 1 is a chronic nerve disorder that occurs most often in the arms or legs after a minor injury. CRPS 2 is caused by an injury to the nerve.  CRPS is thought to result from damage to the nervous system. This includes the nerves that control the blood vessels and sweat glands. The damaged nerves are no longer able to properly control blood flow, feeling (sensation), and temperature to the affected area. This leads to problems in the: Blood vessels Bones Muscles Nerves Skin  Possible causes of CRPS: Injury directly to a nerve Injury or infection in an arm or leg  In rare cases, sudden illnesses such as a  heart attack  or  stroke  can cause CRPS. The condition can sometimes appear without obvious injury to the affected limb. This condition is more common in people ages 40 to 60, but younger people can get it, too. Symptoms 
 
 The key symptom is pain that: Is intense and burning, and is much stronger than would be expected for the type of injury that occurred. Gets worse, rather than better over time. Begins at the point of injury, but may spread to the whole limb, or to the arm or leg on the opposite side of the body.  In most cases, CRPS has 3 stages. But, CRPS does not always follow this pattern. Some people develop severe symptoms right away. Others stay in the first stage. Stage 1 (lasts 1 to 3 months): Changes in skin temperature, switching between warm or cold Faster growth of nails and hair Muscle spasms and joint pain Severe burning, aching pain that worsens with the slightest touch or breeze Skin that slowly becomes blotchy, purple, pale, or red; thin and shiny; swollen; more sweaty  Stage 2 (lasts 3 to 6 months): Continued changes in the skin Nails that are cracked and break more easily Pain that is becoming worse Slower hair growth Stiff joints and weak muscles  Stage 3 (irreversible changes can be seen) Limited movement in limb because of tightened muscles and tendons (contracture) Muscle wasting Pain in the entire limb  If pain and other symptoms are severe or long-lasting, many people may experience depression or anxiety. Exams and Tests 
 
 Diagnosing CRPS can be difficult, but early diagnosis is very important. The doctor will take a medical history and do a physical examination. Other tests may include: A test to show temperature changes and lack of blood supply in the affected limb (thermography) Bone scans Nerve conduction studies X-rays  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for CRPS, but the disease can be slowed. The main focus is on relieving the symptoms and helping people with this syndrome live as normal a life as possible. Physical and occupational therapy should be started as early as possible. Starting an exercise program and learning to keep joints and muscles moving may prevent the disease from getting worse. It can also help you do everyday activities. Medicines may be used, including pain medicines, corticosteroids, certain blood pressure medicines, bone loss drugs and antidepressants. Some type of talk therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or psychotherapy, can help teach the skills needed to live with chronic pain. Surgical or invasive techniques that may be tried: Injected medicine that numbs the affected nerves or pain fibers around the spinal column (nerve block) Internal pain pump that directly delivers medicines to the spinal cord (intrathecal drug pump) Spinal cord stimulator, which involves placing electrodes (electrical leads) next to the spinal cord. A low-level electrical current is used to create a pleasant or tingling sensation in the painful area is the best way to reduce pain in some people. Surgery that cuts the nerves to destroy the pain (surgical sympathectomy), although it is unclear how many people this helps. It may also make some person's symptoms worse.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is better with an early diagnosis. If the doctor diagnoses the condition in the first stage, sometimes signs of the disease may disappear (remission) and normal movement is possible. If the condition is not diagnosed quickly, changes to the bone and muscle may get worse and may not be reversible. In some people, symptoms go away on their own. In other people, even with treatment the pain continues and the condition causes crippling, irreversible changes. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Problems with thinking and judgment
   
  Depression
   
  Loss of muscle size or strength in the affected limb
   
  Spread of the disease to another part of the body
   
  Worsening of the affected limb
   Complications can also occur with some of the nerve and surgical treatments. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you develop constant, burning pain in an arm, leg, hand, or foot. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention at this time. Early treatment is the key to slowing the progression of the disease. Alternative Names 
 
 CRPS; RSDS; Causalgia - RSD; Shoulder-hand syndrome; Reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome; Sudeck atrophy; Pain - CRPS References 
 
 Binder A, Baron R. Complex regional pain syndromes. In: McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turk DC, eds.  Wall and Melzack's Textbook of Pain . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 67. Gorodkin R. Complex regional pain syndrome. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 82. Stanos SP, Tyburski MD, Harden RN. Chronic pain. In: Cifu DX, ed.  Braddom's Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 37. 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia