
 Complement 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Complement is a blood test that measures the activity of certain proteins in the liquid portion of your blood. The complement system is a group of proteins that move freely through your bloodstream. The proteins work with your immune system. They also play a role in the development of inflammation. There are nine major complement proteins. They are labeled C1 through C9. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. This is most often taken through a vein. The procedure is called a  venipuncture .  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel slight pain, while others feel only a prick or sting. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Total complement activity (CH50, CH100) looks at the overall activity of the complement system. In most cases, other tests that are more specific for the suspected disease are done first. C3 and C4 are the complement components measured most often. A complement test may be used to monitor people with an  autoimmune disorder . It is also used to see if treatment for their condition is working. For example, people with active  lupus erythematosus  may have lower-than-normal levels of the complement proteins  C3  and  C4 . Complement activity varies throughout the body. For example, in people with  rheumatoid arthritis , complement activity in the blood may be normal or higher-than-normal, but much lower-than-normal in the joint fluid. People with gram negative  septicemia  and  shock  often have very low C3 and components of what's known as the alternative pathway. C3 is often also low in fungal infections and some parasitic infections such as  malaria . Normal Results 
 
 Total blood complement level: 41 to 90 hemolytic units C1 level: 16 to 33 mg/dL (160 to 330 mg/L) C3 levels: 88 to 252 mg/dL (0.88 to 2.52 g/L) in males; 88 to 206 mg/dL (0.88 to 2.06 g/L) in females C4 levels: 12 to 72 mg/dL (0.12 to 0.72 g/L) in males; 13 to 75 mg/dL (0.13 to 0.75 g/L) in females Note:  mg/dL = milligrams per deciliter; mg/L = milligrams per liter Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased complement activity may be seen in: Cancer Certain infections Ulcerative colitis Decreased complement activity may be seen in: Cirrhosis Glomerulonephritis Hereditary angioedema Hepatitis Kidney transplant  rejection Lupus nephritis Malnutrition Systemic lupus erythematosis Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Considerations 
 
 The "complement cascade" is a series of reactions that take place in the blood. The cascade activates the complement proteins. The result is an attack unit that creates holes in the membrane of bacteria, killing them. Alternative Names 
 
 Complement assay; Complement proteins Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Sullivan KE, Grumach AS. The complement system. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 8.  Read More 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Complement component 3 (C3) 
 Complement component 4 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hepatitis 
 Hereditary angioedema 
 Kidney transplant 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Malaria 
 Protein in diet 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Septicemia 
 Shock 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Lupus 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia