
 Congenital cataract 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A congenital  cataract  is a clouding of the lens of the eye that is present at birth. The lens of the eye is normally clear. It focuses light that comes into the eye onto the  retina . Causes 
 
 Unlike most cataracts, which occur with aging, congenital cataracts are present at birth. Congenital cataracts are rare. In most people, no cause can be found. Congenital cataracts often occur as part of the following birth defects: Chondrodysplasia syndrome Congenital rubella Conradi-Hünermann syndrome Down syndrome (trisomy 21) Ectodermal dysplasia  syndrome Familial congenital cataracts Galactosemia Hallermann-Streiff syndrome Lowe syndrome Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome Pierre-Robin syndrome Trisomy 13 Symptoms 
 
 Congenital cataracts most often look different than other forms of cataract. Symptoms may include: An infant does not seem to be visually aware of the world around him or her (if cataracts are in both eyes) Gray or white cloudiness of the pupil (which is normally black) The "red eye" glow of the pupil is missing in photos, or is different between the 2 eyes Unusual rapid eye movements ( nystagmus )  Exams and Tests 
 
 To diagnose congenital cataract, the infant should have a complete eye exam by an ophthalmologist. The infant may also need to be examined by a pediatrician who is experienced in treating inherited disorders. Blood tests or  x-rays  may also be needed. Treatment 
 
 If congenital cataracts are mild and do not affect vision, they may not need to be treated, especially if they are in both eyes. Moderate to severe cataracts that affect vision, or a cataract that is in only 1 eye, will need to be treated with  cataract removal  surgery. In most (noncongenital) cataract surgeries, an artificial intraocular lens (IOL) is inserted into the eye. The use of IOLs in infants is controversial. Without an IOL, the infant will need to wear a contact lens. Patching to force the child to use the weaker eye is often needed to prevent  amblyopia . The infant may also need to be treated for the inherited disorder that is causing the cataracts. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Removing a congenital cataract is usually a safe, effective procedure. The child will need follow-up for vision rehabilitation. Most infants have some level of "lazy eye" (amblyopia) before the surgery and will need to use patching. Possible Complications 
 
 With cataract surgery there is a very slight risk of: Bleeding Infection Inflammation  Infants who have surgery for congenital cataracts are likely to develop another type of cataract, which may need further surgery or laser treatment. Many of the diseases that are associated with congenital cataract can also affect other organs. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an urgent appointment with your baby's health care provider if: You notice that the pupil of 1 or both eyes appears white or cloudy. The child seems to ignore part of their visual world. Prevention 
 
 If you have a family history of inheritable disorders that could cause congenital cataracts, consider seeking genetic counseling. Alternative Names 
 
 Cataract - congenital Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Cataract - close-up of the eye 
 Rubella syndrome 
 Cataract 
 References 
 
 Dahan E. Pediatric cataract surgery. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 5.13. Heitmancik JF, Datilles M. Congenital and inherited cataracts. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 16th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:chap 74. Junk AK, Morris DA. Cataracts and systemic disease. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 16th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Cataract - adult 
 Ectodermal dysplasia 
 Galactosemia 
 Rubella 
 Trisomy 13 
 
 Review Date 8/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cataract 
 Browse the Encyclopedia