
 Contracture deformity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A contracture develops when the normally stretchy (elastic) tissues are replaced by nonstretchy (inelastic) fiber-like tissue. This tissue makes it hard to stretch the area and prevents normal movement. Contractures mostly occur in the skin, the tissues underneath, and the muscles, tendons, ligaments surrounding a joint. They affect  range of motion  and function in a certain body part. Often, there is also pain. Causes 
 
 Contracture can be caused by any of the following: Brain and nervous system disorders, such as  cerebral palsy  or stroke Inherited disorders (such as  muscular dystrophy ) Nerve damage Reduced use (for example, from lack of mobility) Scarring after traumatic injury  or burns  Home Care 
 
 Follow your health care provider's instructions for treating contracture at home. Treatments may include:  Doing exercises and stretches Using braces and splints When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: A contracture seems to be developing. You notice a decreased ability to move a joint. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Depending on the cause and type of contracture, you may need tests such as an  x-ray . Physical therapy, medicines, orthopedic braces, or surgery may be helpful for some types of contractures. Alternative Names 
 
 Deformity - contracture Images 
 
 
 Contracture deformity 
 References 
 
 Campbell M, Dudek N, Trudel G. Joint contractures. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 126. Skalsky AJ, McDonald CM. Prevention and management of limb contractures in neuromuscular diseases.  Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am . 2012;23(3):675-687. PMID: 22938881  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22938881 . Read More 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 Dupuytren contracture 
 Volkmann ischemic contracture 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia