
 Copper in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Copper is an essential trace mineral present in all body tissues. Function 
 
 Copper works with iron to help the body form red blood cells. It also helps keep the blood vessels, nerves, immune system, and bones healthy. Copper also aids in iron absorption. Food Sources 
 
 Oysters and other  shellfish , whole grains, beans, nuts, potatoes, and organ meats (kidneys, liver) are good sources of copper. Dark leafy greens, dried fruits such as prunes, cocoa, black pepper, and yeast are also sources of copper in the diet. Side Effects 
 
 Normally people have enough copper in the foods they eat. Menkes disease (kinky hair syndrome) is a very rare disorder of copper  metabolism  that is present before birth. It occurs in male infants. Lack of copper may lead to anemia and osteoporosis. In large amounts, copper is poisonous. A rare inherited disorder,  Wilson's disease , causes deposits of copper in the liver, brain, and other organs. The increased copper in these tissues leads to  hepatitis , kidney problems, brain disorders, and other problems. Recommendations 
 
 The Food and Nutrition Board at the Institute of Medicine recommends the following dietary intake for copper: Infants 0 to 6 months: 200 micrograms per day (mcg/day)* 7 to 12 months: 220 mcg/day*  *AI or Adequate Intake  Children 1 to 3 years: 340 mcg/day 4 to 8 years: 440 mcg/day 9 to 13 years: 700 mcg/day  Adolescents and Adults Males and females age 14 to 18 years: 890 mcg/day Males and females age 19 and older: 900 mcg/day Pregnant females: 1,000 mcg/day Lactating females: 1,300 mcg/day  The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods from the food guide plate. Specific recommendations depend on age, gender, and other factors (such as pregnancy). Women who are pregnant or producing breast milk (lactating) need higher amounts. Ask your health care provider which amount is best for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - copper References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron Manganese, Molybdenium, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc.  National Academy Press . Washington, DC, 2001. PMID: 25057538  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057538 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Minerals 
 Browse the Encyclopedia