
 Corns and calluses 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Corns and calluses are thick layers of skin. They are caused by repeated pressure or friction at the spot where the corn or callus develops.  Causes 
 
 Corns and calluses are caused by pressure or friction on skin. A corn is thickened skin on the top or side of a toe. Most of the time it is caused by bad fitting shoes. A callus is thickened skin on your hands or the soles of your feet. The thickening of the skin is a protective reaction. For example, farmers and rowers get calluses on their hands that prevent blisters from forming. People with  bunions  often develop a callus over the bunion because it rubs against the shoe. Corns and calluses are not serious problems. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Skin is thick and hardened. Skin may be flaky and dry. Hardened, thick skin areas are found on hands, feet, or other areas that may be rubbed or pressed. The affected areas can be painful and may bleed.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will make the diagnosis after looking at your skin. In most cases, tests are not needed. Treatment 
 
 Preventing friction is often the only treatment needed. To treat corns: If poor fitting shoes are causing the corn, changing to shoes that fit better will help get rid of the problem most of the time. Protect the corn with a doughnut-shaped corn pad while it is healing. You can buy these at most drug stores.  To treat calluses: Calluses often occur due to excess pressure placed on the skin because of another problem such as bunions or hammertoes. Proper treatment of any underlying condition should prevent the calluses from returning. Wear gloves to protect your hands during activities that cause friction (such as gardening and weight lifting) can help prevent calluses.  If an infection or ulcer occurs in an area of a callus or corn, the tissue may need to be removed by a provider. You may need to take antibiotics. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Corns and calluses are rarely serious. They should improve with proper treatment and not cause long-term problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of corns and calluses are rare. People with  diabetes  are prone to ulcers and infections and should regularly examine their feet to identify any problems right away. Such foot injuries need medical attention. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Check your feet carefully if you have diabetes or numbness in the feet or toes. Otherwise, the problem should resolve with changing to better-fitting shoes or wearing gloves. Call your provider if: You have diabetes and notice problems with your feet. You think your corn or callus is not getting better with treatment. You have continued symptoms of pain, redness, warmth, or drainage from the area.  Alternative Names 
 
 Calluses and corns Images 
 
 
 Corns and calluses 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 American Diabetes Association. Standard of medical care in diabetes 2015 abridged for primary care providers.  Clin Diabetes . 2015;33(2):97-111. PMID: 25897193  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25897193 . Murphy AG. Lesser toe abnormalities. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 83. Read More 
 
 Bunions 
 Diabetes 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dennis Ogiela, MD, Orthopedic Surgery and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT.  Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Corns and Calluses 
 Browse the Encyclopedia