
 Cryptosporidium enteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cryptosporidium enteritis is an infection of the small intestine that causes diarrhea. The parasite cryptosporidium causes this infection. Causes 
 
  
 Cryptosporidium has recently been recognized as a cause of  diarrhea  worldwide in all age groups. It has a greater effect on people with a weakened immune system, including: 
  People who take medicines to suppress their immune system
   
  People with HIV or  AIDS 
  Transplant recipients
   In these groups, this infection is not just bothersome. It also can lead to severe and life-threatening loss of muscle and body mass (wasting) and malnutrition. The major risk factor is drinking water that is contaminated with feces (stool). People at higher risk include: 
  Animal handlers
   
  Men who have sex with men
   
  People who are in close contact with infected people
   
  Young children
   Outbreaks have been linked to: 
  Drinking from contaminated public water supplies
   
  Drinking unpasteurized cider
   
  Swimming in contaminated pools and lakes
   Some outbreaks have been very large. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of infection include: Abdominal cramping Diarrhea, which is often watery, large-volume, and occurs many times a day 
   General sick feeling ( malaise )
    Malnutrition and weight loss (in severe cases) Nausea Exams and Tests 
 
 These tests may be done: Antibody test to see if cryptosporidium is in the stool Intestinal biopsy (rare) Stool exam with special techniques (AFB staining) Stool exam  using a microscope to look for the parasites and their eggs Treatment 
 
 There are several treatments for cryptosporidium enteritis. Drugs such as nitazoxanide have been used in children and adults. Other drugs that are sometimes used include: Atovaquone Paromomycin These drugs often help only for a little while. It is common for the infection to return. The best approach is to improve immune function in people who have a weakened immune system. In people with AIDS, this can be done by using highly active antiviral therapy. It can lead to a complete remission of cryptosporidium enteritis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In healthy people, the infection will clear up, but it can last up to a month. In people with a  weakened immune system , long-term diarrhea may cause weight loss and malnutrition. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Inflammation of a bile duct Inflammation of the gallbladder Inflammation of the liver (hepatitis) Malabsorption  (not enough nutrients being absorbed from the intestinal tract) Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) Loss of body mass that causes extreme thinness and weakness (wasting syndrome) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you develop watery diarrhea that does not go away within a few days, especially if you have a weakened immune system. Prevention 
 
 Proper sanitation and hygiene, including handwashing, are important measures for preventing this illness. Certain water filters can also reduce risk by filtering out the cryptosporidium eggs. However, the pores of the filter must be smaller than 1 micron to be effective. If you have a weakened immune system, ask your provider if you need to boil your water. Alternative Names 
 
 Cryptosporidiosis Images 
 
 
 Cryptosporidium, organism 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Huston CD. Intestinal protozoa. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 113. Lima AAM, Guerrant RL. Cryptosporidiosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 350. White AC Jr. Cryptosporidiosis ( Cryptosporidium  species). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 284. Wright SG. Protozoan infections of the gastrointestinal tract.  Infect Dis Clin N Am . 2012;26(2):323-339. PMID: 22632642  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22632642 . Read More 
 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Malabsorption 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cryptosporidiosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia