
 Cryptococcosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cryptococcosis is infection with the fungi  Cryptococcus neoformans  and  Cryptococcus gattii . Causes 
 
 C. neoformans  and  C. gattii  are the fungi that cause this disease. Infection with  C. neoformans  is seen worldwide. Infection with  C. gattii  is mainly seen in the U.S. Pacific Northwest, British Columbia in Canada, Southeast Asia, and Australia. It is the more common fungus that causes the infection. Both types of fungi are found in soil. If you breathe the fungus in, it infects your lungs. The infection may go away on its own, remain in the lungs only, or spread throughout the body (disseminate). Cryptococcosis is most often seen in people with a weak immune system, such as those who: Are infected with  HIV/AIDS Take high doses of corticosteroid medicines Cancer Are on chemotherapy medicines for cancer Have  Hodgkin disease Have had an organ transplant C. gattii  may affect people with normal immune system. C. neoformans  is the most common life-threatening cause of fungal infection in people with HIV/AIDS. People between 20 to 40 years of age have this infection.  Symptoms 
 
 The infection may spread to the brain in people who have a weakened immune system. Neurological (brain) symptoms start slowly. Most people have swelling and irritation of the brain and spinal cord when they are diagnosed. Symptoms of brain infection may include: Fever  and headache Neck stiffness Nausea  and vomiting Blurred vision  or double vision Confusion The infection can also affect the lungs and other organs. Lung symptoms may include: Difficulty in breathing Cough Chest pain Other symptoms may include: Bone pain  or tenderness of the breastbone Fatigue Skin rash , including pinpoint red spots ( petechiae ), ulcers, or other skin lesions Sweating  -- unusual, excessive at night Swollen glands Unintentional weight loss People with a healthy immune system may have no symptoms at all. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms and travel history. The physical exam may reveal: Abnormal breath sounds Fast heart rate Fever Mental status changes Stiff neck  Tests that may be done include: Blood culture to differentiate between the two fungi CT scan of the head Sputum culture  and stain Lung biopsy Bronchoscopy  and bronchoalveolar lavage Spinal tap  to obtain a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture  and other tests to check for signs of infection Chest x-ray Cryptococcal antigen test (looks for a certain molecule that is shed from the cell wall of the  Cryptococcus neoformans  fungus into the bloodstream)  Treatment 
 
 Some infections require no treatment. Even so, there should be regular checkups for a full year to make sure the infection has not spread. If there are lung lesions or the disease spreads, your provider will prescribe you antifungal medicines. These medicines may need to be taken for a long time. Medicines include: Amphotericin B (can have severe side effects) Flucytosine Fluconazole Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Central nervous system  involvement often causes death or leads to permanent damage. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of cryptococcosis, especially if you have a weakened immune system. Alternative Names 
 
 C. neoformans var. neoformans infection; C. neoformans var. gatti infection; C. neoformans var. grubii infection Images 
 
 
 Cryptococcus, cutaneous on the hand 
 Cryptococcosis on the forehead 
 References 
 
 Chan PA. Cryptococcosis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2017 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017: 333-333.e1. Kauffman CA. Cryptococcosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicin e. 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 336. Perfect JR. Cryptococcosis ( Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 264. Robles WS, Ameen M. Cryptococcosis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 47. Read More 
 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 HIV/AIDS and Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia