
 CSF myelin basic protein 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 CSF myelin basic protein is a test to measure the level of  myelin  basic protein (MBP) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  The CSF is the clear liquid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. MBP is found in the material that covers many of your nerves. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of spinal fluid is needed. This is done using a  lumbar puncture . Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to see if myelin is breaking down.  Multiple sclerosis  is the most common cause for this, but other causes may include: Bleeding of the central nervous system Central nervous system trauma Certain brain diseases (encephalopathies) Infection of the central nervous system Stroke Normal Results 
 
 In general, there should be less than 4 ng/mL of myelin basic protein in the CSF. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Myelin basic protein levels between 4 to 8 ng/mL may be a sign of a  chronic  breakdown of myelin. It may also indicate recovery from an  acute  episode of myelin breakdown. If the myelin basic protein level is greater than 9 ng/mL, myelin is actively breaking down. References 
 
 Greene, DN, Schmidt, RL, Wilson, AR, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid myelin basic protein is frequently ordered but has little value.  Am J Clin Pathol.  2012:138:262-272 PMID: 22904139  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22904139 . 
  Houtchens MK, Lublin FD, Miller AE, et al. Multiple sclerosis and other inflammatory demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 54. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Chronic 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Myelin 
 Spinal cord trauma 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Multiple Sclerosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia