
 CSF total protein 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 CSF total protein is a test to determine the amount of  protein  in your spinal fluid, also called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of CSF is needed (1 to 5 ml). A
 lumbar puncture (spinal tap)  is the most common way to collect this sample. Rarely, other methods are used for collecting CSF such as:  Cisternal puncture Ventricular puncture Removal of CSF from a tube that is already in the CSF, such as a shunt or ventricular drain. After the sample is taken, it is sent to a lab for evaluation. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may have this test to help diagnose: Tumors Infection Inflammation of several groups of nerve cells Vasculitis  Blood in the spinal fluid Multiple sclerosis (MS) Normal Results 
 
 The normal protein range varies from lab to lab, but is typically about 15 to 60 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 0.15 to 0.6 milligrams per milliliter (mg/mL). Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal protein level in the CSF suggests a problem in the central nervous system. Increase protein level may be a sign of a tumor, bleeding, nerve inflammation, or injury. A blockage in the flow of spinal fluid can cause the rapid buildup of protein in the lower spinal area. A decrease in protein level can mean your body is rapidly producing spinal fluid. Images 
 
 
 CSF protein test 
 References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
 Primary lymphoma of the brain 
 Protein in diet 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and immediate past president of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia