
 CSF analysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is a group of laboratory tests that measure chemicals in the fluid that surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord. The tests may look for proteins, sugar (glucose), and other substances. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of CSF is needed. A  lumbar puncture , also called a spinal tap, is the most common way to collect this sample. Less common ways to take a fluid sample include: Cisternal puncture Removal of CSF from a tube that is already in the CSF, such as a shunt, ventricular drain, or pain pump Ventricular puncture After the sample is taken, it is sent to the laboratory for evaluation. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will tell you how to prepare for  lumbar puncture .  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Analysis of CSF can help detect certain conditions and diseases. All of the following can be, but are not always, measured in a sample of CSF: Antibodies and DNA of common viruses Bacteria (including that which causes syphilis; see: VDRL test ) Cell count Chloride Cryptococcal  antigen Glucose Glutamine Lactate dehydrogenase Oligoclonal banding  to look for specific proteins Total protein Whether there are cancerous cells present Normal Results 
 
 Normal results include: Antibodies and DNA of common viruses: None Bacteria: No bacteria grows in a lab culture Cancerous cells: No cancerous cells present Cell count: less than 5 white blood cells (all mononuclear) and 0 red blood cells Chloride: 110 to 125 mEq/L (110 to 125 mmol/L) Fungus: None Glucose: 50 to 80 mg/dL or 2.77 to 4.44 mmol/L (or greater than two-thirds of blood sugar level) Glutamine: 6 to 15 mg/dL (410.5 to 1,026 micromol/L) Lactate dehydrogenase: less than 2.0 to 7.2 U/mL (0.3 to 0.12 microkat/L) Oligoclonal bands: 0 or 1 bands that are not present in a matched serum sample Protein : 15 to 60 mg/dL (0.15 to 0.6 g/L) Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. Note: mg/dL = milligrams per deciliter and mmol/L =  millimoles per liter 
 What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal CSF analysis result may be due to many different causes, including: Cancer Encephalitis  (such as West Nile and Eastern Equine) Hepatic encephalopathy Infection Inflammation Reye syndrome Meningitis  due to bacteria, fungus, tuberculosis, or a virus Multiple sclerosis (MS) Alzheimer disease Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Alternative Names 
 
 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis Images 
 
 
 CSF chemistry 
 References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Martorana A, Sancesario GM, Esposito Z, et al. Plasmin system of Alzheimer's disease: CSF Analysis.  J Neural Transm . 2012:119:763-769. PMID: 22415062.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22415062 .
 Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture 
 CSF cell count 
 CSF coccidioides complement fixation test 
 CSF glucose test 
 CSF oligoclonal banding 
 CSF total protein 
 CSF-VDRL test 
 Cytologic evaluation 
 Lactate dehydrogenase test 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Meningitis 
 Reye syndrome 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN), Coconut Creek, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cancer 
 Encephalitis 
 Meningitis 
 Reye Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia