
 CSF oligoclonal banding 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 CSF oligoclonal banding is a test to look for inflammation-related proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CFS is the clear fluid that flows in the space around the spinal cord and brain. Oligoclonal bands are proteins called immunoglobulins. The presence of these proteins indicates inflammation of the central nervous system. Oligoclonal bands may be a sign of multiple sclerosis. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of CSF is needed. A  lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) is the most common way to collect this sample. Other methods for collecting CSF are rarely used, by may be recommended in some cases. They include: Cisternal puncture Ventricular puncture Removal of CSF from a tube that is already in the CSF, such as a shunt or ventricular drain.  After the sample is taken, it is sent to a lab for testing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test helps support the diagnosis of  multiple sclerosis  (MS). However, it does not confirm the diagnosis. Oligoclonal bands in the CSF can also be seen in other illnesses. Normal Results 
 
 Normally, one or no bands should be found in the CSF. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 There are two or more bandings found in the CSF and not in the blood. This may be a sign of multiple sclerosis or other inflammation. Alternative Names 
 
 Cerebrospinal fluid - immunofixation Images 
 
 
 CSF oligoclonal banding  - series 
 References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Houtchens MK, Lubin FD, Miller AE, Khoury SJ. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 54. Lechner-Scott J, Spencer B, de Malmanche T, et al. The frequency of CSF oligoclonal banding in multiple sclerosis increases with latitude.  Mult Scler . July 2012;18:974-82. PMID: 22185806  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22185806 .  Read More 
 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and immediate past president of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Multiple Sclerosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia