
 CSF cell count 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A CSF cell count is a test to measure the number of red and white blood cells that are in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF is a clear fluid that in the space around the spinal cord and brain. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  lumbar puncture (spinal tap)  is the most common way to collect this sample. Rarely, other methods are used for collecting CSF such as: Cisternal puncture Ventricular puncture Removal of CSF from a tube that is already in the CSF, such as a shunt or ventricular drain. After the sample is taken, it is sent to a lab for evaluation. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The CSF cell count may help detect: Meningitis  and infection of the brain or spinal cord Tumor ,  abscess , or area of tissue death (infarct) Inflammation Bleeding into the spinal fluid  Normal Results 
 
 The normal white blood cell count is between 0 and 5. The normal red blood cell count is 0. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An increase of white blood cells indicates infection, inflammation, or bleeding into the cerebrospinal fluid. Some causes include: Abscess Encephalitis Hemorrhage Meningitis Multiple sclerosis Other infections Stroke Tumor  Finding red blood cells in the CSF may be a sign of bleeding. However, red blood cells in the CSF may also be due to the spinal tap needle hitting a blood vessel. Additional conditions which this test may help diagnose include: Arteriovenous malformation (cerebral) Cerebral aneurysm Delirium Guillain-Barre syndrome Stroke Neurosyphilis Primary lymphoma of the brain Seizure disorders, including epilepsy Spinal tumor Images 
 
 
 CSF cell count 
 References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute 
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 Cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
 Delirium 
 Dementia 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Meningitis 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Neurosyphilis 
 Primary lymphoma of the brain 
 Spinal tumor 
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis 
 Tabes dorsalis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and immediate past president of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cancer 
 Encephalitis 
 Infectious Diseases 
 Meningitis 
 Multiple Sclerosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia