
 Culture - duodenal tissue 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A duodenal tissue culture is a laboratory exam to check a piece of tissue from the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The test is to look for organisms that cause infection. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A piece of tissue from the first part of the small intestine is taken during an upper endoscopy ( esophagogastroduodenoscopy ). The sample is then sent to a lab. There it is placed in a special dish (culture media) that allows bacteria or viruses to grow. The sample is looked at under a microscope regularly to see if any organisms are growing.  Organisms that grow on the culture are identified. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 This is a test done in a lab. The sample is collected during an upper endoscopy and biopsy procedure (esophagogastroduodenoscopy). Ask your health care provider how to prepare for this procedure. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A culture of duodenal tissue is done to check for bacteria or viruses that may lead to certain illnesses and conditions. Normal Results 
 
 No harmful bacteria or viruses are found. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal finding means that harmful bacteria or a virus has been found in the tissue sample. Bacteria may include:  Campylobacter Helicobacter pylori Salmonella  Considerations 
 
 Other tests are very often done to look for infection-causing organisms in duodenal tissue. These tests include the urease test (for example, the CLO test) and histology (looking at the tissue under a microscope). Routine culture for  H pylori  is not currently recommended.  Alternative Names 
 
 Duodenal tissue culture Images 
 
 
 Duodenal tissue culture 
 References 
 
 Beavis KG, Charnot-Katsikas A. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 64. Dupont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Fritsche TR, Pritt BS. Medical parasitology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 63. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Siddiqi HA, Salwen MJ, Shaikh MF, Bowne WB. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 22. 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Biopsy 
 Peptic Ulcer 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia