
 Cytology exam of pleural fluid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A  cytology exam  of pleural fluid is a laboratory test to detect cancer cells and certain other cells in the area that surrounds the lungs. This area is called the pleural space. Cytology means the study of cells. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of fluid from the pleural space is needed. The sample is taken using a procedure called  thoracentesis . The procedure is done in the following way: You sit on a bed or on the edge of a chair or bed. Your head and arms rest on a table. A small area of skin on your back is cleaned. Numbing medicine (local anesthetic) is injected in this area. The doctor inserts a needle through the skin and muscles of the chest wall into the pleural space. Fluid is collected. The needle is removed. A bandage is placed on the skin. The fluid sample is sent to a laboratory. There, it is examined under the microscope to determine what the cells look like and whether they are abnormal. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed before the test. A chest x-ray will likely be done before and after the test. DO NOT cough, breathe deeply, or move during the test to avoid injury to the lung. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel stinging when the local anesthetic is injected. You may feel pain or pressure when the needle is inserted into the pleural space. Tell your health care provider if you feel short of breath or have chest pain. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A cytology exam is used to look for cancer and precancerous cells. It may also be done for other conditions, such as identifying  systemic lupus erythematosus  cells. Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of fluid buildup in the pleural space. This condition is called  pleural effusion . The test may also be done if you have signs of lung cancer. Normal Results 
 
 Normal cells are seen. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 In an abnormal test, there are cancerous (malignant) cells. This may mean there is a cancerous  tumor . This test most often detects: Breast cancer Lymphoma Lung cancer Ovarian cancer Stomach cancer Risks 
 
 Risks are related to thoracentesis and may include: Bleeding Infection Collapse of the lung ( pneumothorax ) Difficulty breathing Alternative Names 
 
 Pleural fluid cytology; Lung cancer - pleural fluid References 
 
 Alder EH, Blok BK. Thoracentesis. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 9. Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Thoracentesis - diagnostic. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:1052-1135. Cibas ES. Pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal fluids. In: Cibas ES, Ducatman BS, eds.  Cytology: Diagnostic Principles and Clinical Correlates . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Lung metastases 
 Pleural effusion 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Cancer 
 Lung Cancer 
 Lymphoma 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia