
 D and C 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 D and C (dialation and curretage) is a procedure to scrape and collect the tissue (endometrium) from inside the uterus. Dilation (D) is a widening of the cervix to allow instruments into the uterus. Curettage (C) is the scraping of the walls of the uterus. Description 
 
 D and C, also called uterine scraping, may be performed in the hospital or in a clinic while you are under  general  or local anesthesia. The health care provider will insert an instrument called a speculum into the vagina. This holds open the vaginal canal. Numbing medicine may be applied to the opening to the uterus ( cervix ). The cervical canal is widened, and a curette (a metal loop on the end of a long, thin handle) is passed through the opening into the uterus cavity. The provider gently scrapes the inner layer of tissue, called the endometrium. The tissue is collected for examination. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This procedure may be done to: Diagnose or rule out conditions such as  uterine cancer Remove tissue after a  miscarriage Treat heavy menstrual bleeding, irregular periods, or  bleeding between periods Perform a therapeutic or elective abortion  Your provider may also recommend a D and C if you have: Abnormal bleeding while you are on hormone replacement therapy An embedded intrauterine device ( IUD ) Bleeding after menopause Endometrial polyps (small lumps of tissue on the endometrium) Thickening of the uterus  This list may not include all possible reasons for a D and C. Risks 
 
 Risks related to D and C include: Puncture of the uterus Scarring of the uterine lining ( Asherman syndrome , may lead to  infertility  later) Tear of the cervix Risks due to anesthesia include: Reactions to medicines Problems breathing Risks of any surgery include: Bleeding Infection After the Procedure 
 
 The D and C procedure has few risks. It can provide relief from bleeding and can help diagnose cancer and other diseases. You may return to your normal activities as soon as you feel better, possibly even the same day.  You may have vaginal bleeding, pelvic cramps, and back pain for a few days after the procedure. You can usually manage pain well with medicines. Avoid using tampons and having sexual intercourse for 1 to 2 weeks after the procedure. Alternative Names 
 
 Dilatation and curettage; Uterus scraping; Vaginal bleeding - dilation; Uterine bleeding - dilation; Menopause - dilation Images 
 
 
 D and C 
 D and C  - series 
 References 
 
 Bulun SE. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Lobo RA. Abnormal uterine bleeding: ovulatory and anovulatory dysfunctional uterine bleeding: management of acute and chronic excessive bleeding. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 37. Read More 
 
 Biopsy 
 Birth control and family planning 
 Cervix 
 Endometrial cancer 
 Hyperplasia 
 Infertility 
 Miscarriage 
 Vaginal bleeding between periods 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abortion 
 Ectopic Pregnancy 
 Female Infertility 
 Miscarriage 
 Uterine Cancer 
 Uterine Diseases 
 Vaginal Bleeding 
 Browse the Encyclopedia