
 D-xylose absorption 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 D-xylose absorption is a laboratory test to determine how well the intestines absorb a simple sugar (D-xylose). The test helps determine if nutrients are being properly absorbed. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test requires a blood and urine sample. These tests include: Clean catch urine specimen Venipuncture (blood draw) There are several ways to perform this test. A typical procedure is described below, but make sure you follow the specific instructions you are given. You will be asked to drink 8 ounces (240 ml) of water that contains 25 grams of a sugar called d-xylose. The amount of d-xylose that comes out in your urine over the next 5 hours will be measured. You may have a blood sample collected at 1 and 3 hours after drinking the liquid. The amount of urine you produce over a 5-hour period is also determined. Your health care provider will tell you how to collect all of the urine during a 5-hour period. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not eat or drink anything (even water) for 8 to 12 hours before the test. Do not exercise before the test. A failure to restrict activity may affect test results. Your provider may tell you to stop taking certain drugs that can affect test results. Drugs that can affect test results include aspirin, atropine, indomethacin, isocarboxazid, and phenelzine. Never stop taking any medicine without first talking to your doctor. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, you may feel moderate pain, or only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Urine is collected as part of normal urination with no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have: Persistent diarrhea Signs of malnutrition Unexplained weight loss  This test is primarily used to determine if nutrient absorption problems are due to a disease of the intestines. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result depends on how much D-xylose is given. In most cases, the test results are either positive or negative. A positive result means that D-xylose is found in the blood or urine and is therefore being absorbed by the intestines. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Lower than normal values may be seen in: Celiac disease (sprue) Crohn disease Giardia  lamblia infestation Hookworm  infestation Lymphatic obstruction Radiation enteropathy Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth Viral gastroenteritis Whipple disease Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Considerations 
 
 Multiple tests may be necessary to determine the reason for  malabsorption . Alternative Names 
 
 Xylose tolerance test; Diarrhea - xylose; Malnutrition - xylose; Sprue - xylose; Celiac - xylose Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 D-xylose level tests 
 References 
 
 Hogenauer C, Hammer HF. Maldigestion and malabsorption. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 104. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Crohn disease 
 Giardia infection 
 Hookworm infection 
 Lymphatic obstruction 
 Radiation enteritis 
 Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) 
 Whipple disease 
 
 Review Date 1/28/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Celiac Disease 
 Crohn's Disease 
 Gastroenteritis 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia