
 Dehydration 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dehydration occurs when your body does not have as much water and fluids as it should. Dehydration can be mild, moderate, or severe, based on how much of your body's fluid is lost or not replaced. Severe dehydration is a life-threatening emergency. Causes 
 
 You can become dehydrated if you lose too much fluid, do not drink enough water or fluids, or both.  Your body may lose a lot of fluid from: Sweating too much, for example, from exercising in hot weather Fever Vomiting  or  diarrhea Urinating too much  (uncontrolled diabetes or some medications, like diuretics, can cause you to urinate a lot)  You might not drink enough fluids because: You do not feel like eating or drinking because you are sick You are nauseated You have a  sore throat  or  mouth sores Older adults and people with certain diseases, such as diabetes, are also at higher risk for dehydration. Symptoms 
 
 Signs of mild to moderate dehydration:  Thirst Dry or sticky mouth Not urinating much Darker yellow urine Dry, cool skin Headache Muscle cramps  Signs of severe dehydration: Not urinating, or very dark yellow or amber-colored urine Dry, shriveled skin Irritability or confusion Dizziness or light-headedness Rapid heartbeat Rapid breathing Sunken eyes Listlessness Shock (not enough blood flow through the body) Unconsciousness or delirium  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look for these signs of dehydration: Low blood pressure Blood pressure that drops when you stand up after lying down White finger tips that do not return to a pink color  after your doctor presses the fingertip Skin that is not as elastic as normal . When the provider pinches it into a fold, it may slowly sag back into place. Normally, skin springs back right away. Rapid heart rate Your doctor may do lab tests: Blood tests to check  kidney function Urine tests  to see what may be causing dehydration Other tests to see what may be causing dehydration ( blood sugar test for diabetes )  Treatment 
 
 To treat dehydration: Try sipping water or sucking on ice cubes. Try drinking water or sports drinks that contain electrolytes. Do not take salt tablets. They can cause serious complications. Ask your provider  what you should eat if you have diarrhea .  For more severe dehydration or  heat emergency , you may need to stay in a hospital and  receive fluid through a vein  (IV). The provider will also treat the cause of the dehydration. Dehydration caused by a  stomach virus  should get better on its own after a few days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If you notice signs of dehydration and treat it quickly, you should recover completely. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated severe dehydration may cause: Death Permanent brain damage Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 You should call 911 if:  The person loses consciousness at any time. There is any other change in the person's alertness (for example, confusion or seizures). The person has a fever over 102°F (38.8°C). You notice symptoms of heatstroke (such as rapid pulse or rapid breathing). The person's condition does not improve or gets worse despite treatment.  Prevention 
 
 To prevent dehydration: Drink plenty of fluids every day, even when you are well. Drink more when the weather is hot or you are exercising. If anyone in your family is ill, pay attention to how much they are able to drink. Pay close attention to children and older adults. Anyone with a fever, vomiting, or diarrhea should drink plenty of fluids. DO NOT wait for signs of dehydration. If you think you or someone in your family may become dehydrated, call your provider. Do this before the person becomes dehydrated.  Images 
 
 
 Skin turgor 
 References 
 
 Kenefick RW, Cheuvront SN, O'Brien KK. Dehydration, rehydration, and hyperhydration. In: Auerbach PS.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 70. Padlipsky P. Infectious diarrheal disease and dehydration. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 173. Read More 
 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Pharyngitis - sore throat 
 Seizures 
 Trench mouth 
 Urination - excessive amount 
 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dehydration 
 Browse the Encyclopedia