
 Dementia due to metabolic causes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dementia  is loss of brain function that occurs with certain diseases. Dementia due to  metabolic  causes is a loss of brain function that can occur with abnormal chemical processes in the body. If treated early, brain function can return to normal. Left untreated, permanent brain damage, such as dementia, can occur. Causes 
 
 Possible metabolic causes of dementia include: Hormonal disorders, such as  Addison disease ,  Cushing disease Heavy metal exposure, such as to lead, arsenic, mercury, or manganese Repeat episodes of low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ), most often seen in people with diabetes who use insulin High level of calcium in the blood, such as due to  hyperparathyroidism 
  Low level of thyroid hormone ( hypothyroidism ) or high level of thyroid hormone ( thyrotoxicosis ) in the body Liver cirrhosis Kidney failure Nutritional disorders, such as vitamin B1 deficiency,  vitamin B12  deficiency,  pellagra , or protein-calorie  malnutrition Porphyria Poisons, such as methanol Severe alcohol use Wilson disease Disorders of the mitochondria (energy-producing parts of cells) Rapid changes in sodium level  Symptoms 
 
 Metabolic disorders may cause  confusion  and changes in thinking or reasoning. These changes may be short-term or lasting. Dementia occurs when the symptoms are not reversible. Symptoms can be different for everyone. They depend on the health condition causing the dementia. The early symptoms of dementia can include: Difficulty with tasks that take some thought but used to come easily, such as balancing a checkbook, playing games (such as bridge), and learning new information or routines Getting lost on familiar routes Language problems, such as trouble with names of familiar objects Losing interest in things previously enjoyed, flat mood Misplacing items Personality changes and loss of social skills, which can lead to inappropriate behaviors As the dementia gets worse, symptoms are more obvious and interfere with the ability to take care of yourself: Changing sleep patterns, often waking up at night Forgetting details about current events, forgetting events in one's life history Having difficulty doing basic tasks, such as preparing meals, choosing proper clothing, or driving Having hallucinations, arguments, striking out, and behaving violently More difficulty reading or writing Poor judgment and losing the ability to recognize danger Using the wrong word, not pronouncing words correctly, speaking in confusing sentences Withdrawing from social contact The person may also have symptoms from the disorder that caused dementia. Exams and Tests 
 
 Depending on the cause, a nervous system (neurologic examination) is done to identify the problems. Tests to diagnose a medical condition causing the dementia may include: Ammonia level in the blood Blood chemistry , electrolytes Blood glucose level BUN ,  creatinine  to check kidney function Liver function tests Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) Nutritional assessment Thyroid function tests Urinalysis Vitamin B12 level To rule out certain brain disorders, an  EEG  (electroencephalogram),  head CT scan , or  head MRI scan  is usually done. Treatment 
 
 The aim of treatment is to manage the disorder and control symptoms. With some metabolic disorders, treatment may stop or even reverse the dementia symptoms. Medicines used to treat  Alzheimer disease  have not been shown to work for this type of dementia. Sometimes, these drugs are used anyway, when other treatments fail to control the underlying problems. Plans should also be made for home care for people with dementia. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome varies, depending on the cause of the dementia and the amount of damage to the brain. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include the following: Loss of ability to function or care for self Loss of ability to interact Pneumonia ,  urinary tract infections , and skin infections Pressure sores Symptoms of the underlying problem (such as loss of sensation due to a nerve injury from vitamin B12 deficiency)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if symptoms get worse or continue. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if there is a sudden change in mental status or a life-threatening emergency. Prevention 
 
 Treating the underlying cause may reduce the risk for metabolic dementia. Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic brain - metabolic; Mild cognitive - metabolic; MCI - metabolic Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Budson AE, Solomon PR. Other disorders that cause memory loss or dementia. In: Budson AE, ed.  Memory Loss, Alzheimer Disease, and Dementia . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14. Douglas VC, Josephson SA. Dementia and systemic disease. In: Aminoff MJ, Josephson SA, eds.  Aminoff's Neurology and General Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 61. Knopman DS. Alzheimer disease and other dementias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 402. Peterson R, Graff-Radford J. Alzeimer disease and other dementias. In: Daradoff RB, Jankovc J, Mazzotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 95. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Addison disease 
 Calcium - ionized 
 Confusion 
 Cushing disease 
 Dementia 
 Diabetes and kidney disease 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Electrolytes 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Insulinoma 
 Liver disease 
 Low blood sugar 
 Low sodium level 
 Metabolism 
 Pellagra 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Porphyria 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Vitamin B12 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dementia 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia