
 Dental care - child 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Proper care of your child's teeth and gums includes brushing and rinsing daily. It also includes having routine dental exams, and getting necessary treatments such as fluoride, extractions, fillings, or braces and other orthodontics.  Information 
 
 Your child must have healthy teeth and gums for overall good health. Injured, diseased, or poorly developed teeth can result in: Poor nutrition Painful and dangerous infections Problems with speech development Poor self-image  CARING FOR AN INFANT'S TEETH Even though newborns and infants do not have teeth, it is important to take care of their mouth and gums. Follow these tips: Use a damp washcloth to wipe your infant's gums after each meal. DO NOT put your infant or young child to bed with a bottle of milk, juice, or sugar water. Use only water for bedtime bottles. Begin using a soft toothbrush instead of a washcloth to clean your child's teeth as soon as their first tooth shows (usually between 5 and 8 months of age). Ask your child's health care provider if your infant needs to  take oral fluoride .  THE FIRST TRIP TO THE DENTIST Your child's first visit to the dentist should be between the time the first tooth appears and the time when all the primary teeth are visible (before 2 1/2 years). Many dentists recommend a "trial" visit. This can help your child get used to the sights, sounds, smells, and feel of the office before their actual exam. Children who are used to having their gums wiped and teeth brushed every day will be more comfortable going to the dentist.  CARING FOR A CHILD'S TEETH Brush your child's teeth and gums at least twice each day and especially before bed. Take your child to a dentist every 6 months. Let the dentist know if your child thumb sucks or breathes through the mouth. Teach your child how to play safe and what to do if a tooth is broken or knocked out.  If you act quickly, you can often save the tooth . When your child has permanent teeth, they should begin flossing each evening before going to bed. When your child is a teenager, braces or extractions may be needed to prevent long-term problems.  Images 
 
 
 Teach children to brush 
 Infant dental care 
 References 
 
 Chou R, Cantor A, Zakher B, Mitchell JP, Pappas M. Preventing dental caries in children <5 years: systematic review updating USPSTF recommendation.  Pediatrics . 2013;132(2);332-350. PMID: 23858419  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23858419 . Hughes CV, Dean JA. Mechanical and chemotherapeutic home oral hygiene. In: Dean JA, ed.  McDonald and Avery's Dentistry for the Child and Adolescent . 10th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:chap 7. Ng MW, Chase I. Early childhood caries: risk-based disease prevention and management.  Dent Clin North Am . 2013;57(1):1-16. PMID: 23174607  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23174607 . Read More 
 
 Dental care - adult 
 
 Review Date 2/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael Kapner, DDS, general and aesthetic dentistry, Norwalk Medical Center, Norwalk, CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Child Dental Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia