
 Developmental milestones record - 2 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article describes the skills and growth targets of 2-month-old infants. Information 
 
 Physical and motor-skill markers: Closing of soft spot at the back of the head (posterior  fontanelle ) Several  newborn reflexes , such as the stepping reflex (baby appears to dance or step when placed upright on solid surface) and grasp reflex (grasping a finger), disappear Less head lag (head is less wobbly on the neck) When on stomach, able to lift head almost 45 degrees Less flexing of the arms and legs while lying on the stomach  Sensory and cognitive markers: Beginning to look at close objects Coos Different cries means different things Head turns from side to side with sound at the level of the ear Smiles Responds to familiar voices Healthy babies can cry up to 3 hours per day. If you are worried that you baby cries too much, talk to you doctor.  Play recommendations: Expose your baby to sounds outside those of the home Take your baby for rides in the car or walks in the neighborhood The room should be bright with pictures and mirrors Toys and objects should be bright colors Read to your baby Talk to your baby about objects and people in his or her environment Hold and comfort you baby if they are upset or crying. DO NOT worry about spoiling your 2-month-old.  Alternative Names 
 
 Normal childhood growth milestones - 2 months; Childhood growth milestones - 2 months; Growth milestones for children - 2 months Images 
 
 
 Developmental milestones 
 References 
 
 Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 8. 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia