
 Developmental milestones record - 9 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 At 9 months, a typical infant will have certain skills and reach growth markers called milestones. Information 
 
 All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider. PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND MOTOR SKILLS A 9-month-old has usually reached the following milestones: Gains weight at a slower rate, about 15 grams (half an ounce) per day, 1 pound (450 grams) per month Increases in length by 1.5 centimeters (a little over one-half inch) per month Bowel and bladder become more regular Puts hands forward when the head is pointed to the ground (parachute reflex) to protect self from falling Is able to crawl Sits for long periods Pulls self to standing position Reaches for objects while sitting Bangs objects together Can grasp objects between the tip of the thumb and index finger Feeds self with fingers Throws or shakes objects  SENSORY AND COGNITIVE SKILLS The 9-month-old typically: Babbles Has separation anxiety and may cling to parents Is developing depth perception Understands that objects continue to exist, even when they are not seen (object constancy) Responds to simple commands Responds to name Understands the meaning of "no" Imitates speech sounds May be afraid of being left alone Plays interactive games, such as peek-a-boo and pat-a-cake Waves bye  PLAY To help the 9-month-old develop: Provide picture books. Provide different stimuli by going to the mall to see people, or to the zoo to see animals. Build vocabulary by reading and naming people and objects in the environment. Teach hot and cold through play. Provide large toys that can be pushed to encourage walking. Sing songs together. Avoid television time until age 2. Try using a transition object to help decrease separation anxiety.  Alternative Names 
 
 Growth milestones for children - 9 months; Childhood growth milestones - 9 months; Normal childhood growth milestones - 9 months References 
 
 Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 8. 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Sameer Patel, MD, MPH, Assistant Professor in Pediatrics, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia