
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nerve damage that occurs in people with diabetes is called diabetic neuropathy. This condition is a complication of  diabetes . Causes 
 
 In people with diabetes, the body's nerves can be damaged by decreased blood flow and a high blood sugar level. This condition is more likely when the blood sugar level is not well controlled. About one half of people with diabetes develop nerve damage. Symptoms often do not begin until many years after diabetes has been diagnosed. Some people who have diabetes that develops slowly already have nerve damage when they are first diagnosed. People with diabetes are also at higher risk for other nerve problems not caused by their diabetes. These other nerve problems won't have the same symptoms and will progress in a different manner than nerve damage caused by diabetes. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms often develop slowly over many years. The types of symptoms you have depend on the nerves that are affected. Nerves in the feet and legs are most often affected. Symptoms often start in the toes and feet, and include tingling or burning, or deep pain. Over time, nerve damage can also occur in the fingers and hands. As the damage gets worse, you will likely lose feeling in your feet and legs. Your skin will also become numb. Because of this, you may: 
   Not notice when you step on something sharp
    
   Not know that you have a blister or small cut
    
   Not notice when your feet or hands touch something that is too hot or cold
    When the nerves that control digestion are affected, you may have trouble digesting food. This can make your diabetes harder to control. Damage to nerves that control digestion almost always occurs in people with severe nerve damage in their feet and legs. Symptoms of digestion problems include: 
   Feeling full after eating only a small amount of food
    Heartburn  and bloating 
   Nausea, constipation, or diarrhea
    
   Swallowing problems
    
  Throwing up undigested food a few hours after a meal
    When nerves in your heart and blood vessels are damaged, you may: 
   Feel lightheaded when you stand up (orthostatic  hypotension )
    
   Have a fast heart rate
    
   Not notice  angina , the chest pain that warns of heart disease and heart attack
    Other symptoms of nerve damage are: 
  Sexual problems, which cause trouble getting an erection in men and vaginal dryness or orgasm problems in women.
    
   Not being able to tell when your blood sugar gets too low.
    
   Bladder problems, which cause urine leakage or not being able to empty the bladder.
    
   Sweating too much, even when the temperature is cool, when you're at rest, or at other unusual times.
    
   Feet that are very sweaty (early damage) or very dry (later).
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. The exam may find that you have the following: No reflexes or weak reflexes in the ankle Loss of feeling in the feet (this is checked with a brush-like instrument called a monofilament) Changes in the skin, including dry skin and thick or discolored nails Loss of the ability to sense movement of your joints (proprioception) Drop in blood pressure when you stand up after sitting or lying down Tests that may be ordered include: Electromyogram  (EMG), a recording of electrical activity in muscles Nerve conduction velocity tests (NCV) , a recording of the speed at which signals travel along nerves Gastric emptying study to check how fast food leaves the stomach and enters the small intestine Tilt table study to check if the nervous system is properly controlling blood pressure Treatment 
 
 Follow your provider's advice on how to slow diabetic nerve damage.  Control your blood sugar (glucose) level by: Eating healthy foods Getting regular exercise Checking your blood sugar as often as instructed and keeping a record of your numbers so that you know the types of foods and activities that affect your blood sugar level Taking oral medicine or injections as instructed by your provider  To  treat the symptoms of nerve damage , your provider may prescribe medicines to treat: Pain in your feet, legs, or arms Nausea, vomiting, or other digestion problems Bladder problems Erection problems or vaginal dryness  When you have nerve damage in your feet, the feeling in your feet can be reduced. You can even have no feeling at all. As a result, your feet may not heal well if they are injured.  Caring for your feet  can prevent minor problems from becoming so serious that you end up in the hospital. Caring for your feet includes: 
   Checking your feet every day
    
   Getting a foot exam each time you see your provider
    
   Wearing the right kind of socks and shoes (ask your provider about this)
    Support Groups 
 
 Many resources can help you understand more about diabetes. You can also learn ways to manage your diabetic nerve disease American Diabetes Association:  www.diabetes.org National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases:  www.diabetes.niddk.nih.gov Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treatment relieves pain and controls some symptoms. Other problems that may develop include: Bladder or kidney infection Diabetes foot ulcers Nerve damage that hides the symptoms of the chest pain ( angina ) that warns of heart disease and a heart attack Loss of a toe, foot, or leg through amputation, often because of a bone infection that does not heal When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop any symptoms of diabetic neuropathy. Alternative Names 
 
 Diabetic neuropathy; Diabetes - neuropathy; Diabetes - peripheral neuropathy Images 
 
 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes: 9. microvascular complications and foot care.  Diabetes Care . 2016:39;Suppl 1:S72-S80.  care.diabetesjournals.org/content/39/Supplement_1/S72 .
 Boulton AJM, Malik RA. Diabetes mellitus: neuropathy. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 53. Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Read More 
 
 Blood sugar test - blood 
 Diabetes 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Peripheral 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diabetes - foot ulcers 
 Type 2 diabetes - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 5/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetic Nerve Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia