
 Digestive diseases 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Digestive diseases are disorders of the digestive tract, which is sometimes called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. In digestion, food and drink are broken down into small parts (called nutrients) that the body can absorb and use as energy and building blocks for cells. The digestive tract is made up of the esophagus (food tube), stomach, large and small intestines, liver, pancreas, and the gallbladder. Information 
 
 The first sign of problems in the digestive tract often includes one or more of the following symptoms: Bleeding Bloating Constipation Diarrhea Heartburn Incontinence Nausea and vomiting Pain in the belly Swallowing problems Weight  gain  or  loss A digestive disease is any health problem that occurs in the digestive tract. Conditions may range from mild to serious. Some common problems include  cancer ,  irritable bowel syndrome , and  lactose intolerance . Other digestive diseases include: Gallstones ,  cholecystitis , and  cholangitis Rectal problems, such as  anal fissure ,  hemorrhoids ,  proctitis , and  rectal prolapse Esophagus problems, such as  stricture  (narrowing) and  achalasia Liver problems, such as  hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C ,  cirrhosis , liver failure, and autoimmune and  alcoholic hepatitis Pancreatitis and  pancreatic pseudocyst Intestinal problems, such as polyps and cancer, infections,  celiac disease ,  Crohn disease ,  ulcerative colitis ,  diverticulitis ,  malabsorption ,  short bowel syndrome , and  intestinal ischemia Gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ),  peptic ulcer  disease, and  hiatal hernia Tests for digestive problems can include  colonoscopy , upper GI  endoscopy , capsule endoscopy, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), and endoscopic  ultrasound . Many surgical procedures are performed on the digestive tract. These include procedures done using endoscopy, laparoscopy, and open surgery. Organ transplants can be performed on the liver, pancreas, and small intestine. Many health care providers can help diagnose and treat digestive problems. A gastroenterologist is a physician specialist who has received extra training in the diagnosis and treatment of the digestive disorders. Other health care providers involved in the treatment of digestive diseases include: Nurse practitioners  (NPs) or  physician assistants  (PAs) Nutritionists or dietitians Primary care doctors Radiologists Surgeons Images 
 
 
 Normal abdominal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Bkope ET, Kellerman RD. The digestive system. In: Bope ET, ed.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 8. Mayer EA. Functional gastrointestinal disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 137. 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia