
 Digital rectal exam 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A digital rectal exam is an examination of the lower rectum. The health care provider uses a gloved, lubricated finger to check for any abnormal findings. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The provider will first look at the outside of the anus for  hemorrhoids  or fissures. Then the provider will put on a glove and insert a lubricated finger into the rectum. In women, this exam may be done at the same time as a pelvic exam. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 For the test, the provider will ask you to: Try to relax Take a deep breath during the insertion of the finger into your rectum  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel mild discomfort during this test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is performed for many reasons. It may be done:  As part of a routine yearly physical exam in both men and women When your provider suspects you are bleeding somewhere in your digestive tract When men are having symptoms that suggest the  prostate is enlarged  or you may have a prostate infection  In men, the test can be used to check the size of the prostate and to look for abnormal bumps or other changes of the prostate gland. A digital rectal exam may be done to collect stool for testing for  fecal occult (hidden) blood  as part of screening for cancer of the rectum or colon. Normal Results 
 
 A normal finding means the provider did not detect any problem during the exam. However, this test does not rule out all problems. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result may be due to: A prostate problem, such as an  enlarged prostate gland ,  prostate infection , or  prostate cancer Bleeding anywhere in the digestive tract Cancer of the rectum or colon Small split or tear  in the thin moist tissue lining of the anus (called anal fissure) An  abscess , when pus collects in the area of the anus and rectum  Hemorrhoids , swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum Alternative Names 
 
 DRE Images 
 
 
 Prostate cancer 
 References 
 
 Abdelnaby A, Downs MJ. Diseases of the anorectum. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 129. Loeb S, Carter HB. Early detection, diagnosis, and staging of prostate cancer. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 99. Read More 
 
 Colon cancer 
 Prostate cancer 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anal Disorders 
 Enlarged Prostate (BPH) 
 Prostate Cancer 
 Prostate Cancer Screening 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia