
 Diphtheria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diphtheria is an  acute  infection caused by the bacteria  Corynebacterium diphtheriae . Causes 
 
 The bacteria that cause diphtheria spread through respiratory droplets (such as from a cough or sneeze) of an infected person or someone who carries the bacteria but has no symptoms. The bacteria most commonly infects your nose and throat. The throat infection causes a gray to black, tough, fiber-like covering, which can block your airways. In some cases, diphtheria infects your skin first and causes  skin lesions . Once you are infected, the bacteria make dangerous substances called toxins. The toxins spread through your bloodstream to other organs, such as the heart and brain, and cause damage. Because of widespread vaccination (immunization) of children, diphtheria is now rare in many parts of the world.  Risk factors for diphtheria include crowded environments, poor hygiene, and lack of immunization. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually occur 1 to 7 days after the bacteria enter your body: Fever  and chills Sore throat,  hoarseness Painful swallowing Croup-like (barking) cough Drooling  (suggests airway blockage is about to occur) Bluish coloration of the skin Bloody, watery drainage from nose Breathing problems, including difficulty breathing, fast breathing, high-pitched breathing sound (stridor) Skin sores (usually seen in tropical areas)  Sometimes there are no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and look inside your mouth. This may reveal a gray to black covering (pseudomembrane) in the throat,  enlarged lymph glands , and swelling of the neck or vocal cords. Tests used may include: Gram stain or  throat culture  to identify the diphtheria bacteria Toxin assay (to detect the presence of the toxin made by the bacteria) Electrocardiogram ( ECG )  Treatment 
 
 If the provider thinks you have diphtheria, treatment will likely be started right away, even before test results come back. Diphtheria antitoxin is given as a shot into a muscle or through an IV (intravenous line). The infection is then treated with antibiotics, such as penicillin and erythromycin. You may need to stay in the hospital while getting the antitoxin. Other treatments may include: Fluids by IV Oxygen Bed rest Heart monitoring Insertion of a breathing tube Correction of airway blockages People without symptoms who carry diphtheria should be treated with antibiotics. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Diphtheria may be mild or severe. Some people do not have symptoms. In others, the disease can slowly get worse. Recovery from the illness is slow. People may die, especially when the disease affects the heart.  Possible Complications 
 
 The most common complication is inflammation of the heart muscle ( myocarditis ). The nervous system is also frequently and severely affected, which may result in temporary  paralysis . The diphtheria toxin can also damage the kidneys. There can also be an allergic response to the antitoxin. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider right away if you have come in contact with a person who has diphtheria. Diphtheria is a rare disease. It is also a  reportable disease , and any cases are often publicized in the newspaper or on television. This helps you to know if diphtheria is present in your area. Prevention 
 
 Routine childhood immunizations and adult boosters prevent the disease. Anyone who has come into contact with an infected person should get an  immunization  or booster shot against diphtheria, if they have not already received it. Protection from the vaccine lasts only 10 years. So it is important for adults to get a booster vaccine every 10 years. The booster is called tetanus-diphtheria ( Td ). (The shot also has vaccine medicine for an infection called  tetanus .) If you have been in close contact with a person who has diphtheria, contact your provider right away. Ask whether you need antibiotics to prevent getting diphtheria. Alternative Names 
 
 Respiratory diphtheria; Pharyngeal diphtheria; Diphtheric cardiomyopathy; Diphtheric polyneuropathy Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 MacGregor RR. Corynebacterium diphtheriae. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 206. Stechenberg BW. Diphtheria. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 90. Tiwari TSP, Wharton M. Diphtheria toxoid. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, Offit PA, eds.  Vaccines . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Asymptomatic 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Incidence 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Muscle function loss 
 Myocarditis 
 Necrosis 
 Pericarditis 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Rashes 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diphtheria 
 Browse the Encyclopedia