
 Dirt - swallowing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article is about poisoning from swallowing or eating dirt. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 There are no specific poisonous ingredients in dirt. But dirt might contain chemicals that kill insects or plants, fertilizers, parasites, or animal or human waste.  Symptoms 
 
 Swallowing dirt may cause constipation and a blockage in the intestines. These can cause  stomach pain. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The person may not need to go to the emergency room. If they do go, treatment may include: Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (if the intestines are blocked)  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is very likely unless the dirt contains something that can cause health problems. References 
 
 Dent AE, Kazura JW. Strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, et al., eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 295. Messacar K, Dominguez SR, Levin MJ. Infections: parasitic and mycotic. In: Hay WW Jr, Levin MJ, Sondheimer JM, et al., eds.  Current Diagnosis and Treatment: Pediatrics . 22nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2014:chap 43.  
 Review Date 7/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washington. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia