
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation is a serious disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become overactive. Causes 
 
 When you are injured, proteins in the blood that form blood clots travel to the injury site to help stop bleeding. If these proteins become abnormally active throughout the body, you could develop disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The underlying cause is usually due to inflammation, infection, or cancer. In some cases of DIC, small  blood clots  form in the blood vessels. Some of these clots can clog the vessels and cut off the normal blood supply to organs such as the liver, brain, or kidneys. Lack of blood flow can damage and cause major injury to the organs. In other cases of DIC, the clotting proteins in your blood are consumed. When this happens, you may have a high risk of serious bleeding, even from a minor injury or without injury. You may also have bleeding that starts spontaneously (on its own). The disease can also cause your healthy red blood cells to fragment and break up when they travel through the small vessels that are filled with clots. Risk factors for DIC include: Blood transfusion reaction Cancer, especially certain types of leukemia Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) Infection in the blood, especially by bacteria or fungus Liver disease Pregnancy complications (such as placenta that is left behind after delivery) Recent surgery or anesthesia Severe tissue injury (as in burns and head injury) Large hemangioma (a blood vessel that is not formed properly) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of DIC may include any of the following: Bleeding, from many sites in the body Blood clots Bruising Drop in blood pressure  Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have any of the following tests: Complete blood count  with blood smear exam Fibrin degradation products Partial thromboplastin time  (PTT) Prothrombin time  (PT) Fibrinogen blood test Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for DIC. The goal is to determine and treat the underlying cause of DIC. Supportive treatments may include: Plasma transfusions to replace blood clotting factors if a large amount of bleeding is occurring. Blood thinner medicine (heparin) to prevent blood clotting if a large amount of clotting is occurring. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on what is causing the disorder. DIC can be life threatening. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications from DIC may include: Bleeding Lack of blood flow to the arms, legs, or vital organs Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call 911 if you have bleeding that does not stop.  Prevention 
 
 
 
Get prompt treatment for conditions known to bring on this disorder. 
 Alternative Names 
 
 Consumption coagulopathy; DIC Images 
 
 
 Blood clot formation 
 Meningococcemia on the calves 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Levi M. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 141. Thachil J, Toh CH. Current concepts in the management of disseminated intravascular coagulation.  Thromb Res . 2012;129 Suppl 1:S54-S59. PMID: 22682134  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22682134 . Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Liver disease 
 Mesenteric venous thrombosis 
 Sepsis 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic 
 
 Review Date 12/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Blood Clots 
 Browse the Encyclopedia