
 Distal median nerve dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Distal median nerve dysfunction is a form of  peripheral neuropathy  that affects the movement of or sensation in the hands. A common type of distal median nerve dysfunction is  carpal tunnel syndrome . Causes 
 
 Dysfunction of one nerve group, such as the distal median nerve, is called a  mononeuropathy . Mononeuropathy means there is a local cause of the nerve damage. Sometimes, bodywide ( systemic ) disorders can cause isolated nerve damage. This condition occurs when the nerve is inflamed, trapped, or injured by trauma. The most common reason is trapping (entrapment). Trapping puts pressure on the nerve where it passes through a narrow area. Wrist fractures may injure the median nerve directly. Or, it may increase the risk for trapping the nerve later on. Inflammation of the tendons ( tendonitis ) or joints ( arthritis ) can also put pressure on the nerve. Some repetitive movements increase the chance of developing carpal tunnel entrapment. Problems that affect the tissue near the nerve or cause deposits to form in the tissue can block blood flow and lead to pressure on the nerve. Such conditions include: 
  Too much growth hormone in the body ( acromegaly ) Diabetes 
  Underactive thyroid ( hypothyroidism ) Kidney disease 
  Blood cancer called  multiple myeloma Pregnancy  In some cases, no cause can be found. Diabetes can make this condition worse.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Pain in the wrist or hand that may be severe and wake you up at night, and that may be felt in other areas, such as the upper arm (this is called referred pain) Sensation changes in the thumb, index, middle, and part of the ring fingers, such as a burning feeling,  decreased sensation ,  numbness and tingling Weakness of the hand that causes you to drop things or have difficulty grasping objects or buttoning a shirt Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine your wrist and ask about your medical history. Tests that may be done include: Electromyogram (EMG)  to check the electrical activity of the muscles Nerve conduction tests  to check how fast electrical signals move through a nerve Neuromuscular ultrasound to view problems with the muscles and nerves Nerve biopsy  in which nerve tissue is removed for examination (rarely needed) Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the underlying cause. If the median nerve is affected by carpal tunnel syndrome, a wrist splint can reduce further injury to the nerve and help relieve symptoms. Wearing the splint at night rests the area and decreases inflammation. An injection into the wrist may help with symptoms, but it won't fix the underlying problem.  Surgery  may be needed if a splint or medicines don't help. For other causes, treatment may involve any of the following: Medicines to control nerve pain Treating the medical problem causing nerve damage, such as diabetes or kidney disease Physical therapy to help maintain muscle strength Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the cause of the nerve dysfunction can be identified and treated, there is a good chance of full recovery. In some cases, there is some or complete  loss of movement  or sensation.  Nerve pain  may be severe and persist for a long time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity of the hand (rare) Partial or complete loss of hand movement Partial or complete loss of sensation in the fingers Recurrent or unnoticed injury to the hand When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of distal median nerve dysfunction. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of curing or controlling symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Prevention varies, depending on the cause. In people with diabetes, controlling blood sugar may reduce the risk of developing nerve disorders. For people with jobs that involve repetitive wrist movements, a change in the way the job is performed may be needed. Frequent breaks in activity may also help. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - distal median nerve Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Wolfe VM, Rosenwasser MP, Tang P. Entrapment neuropathies of the arm, elbow, and forearm. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 67. Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 Arthritis 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Distal 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Peripheral 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Systemic 
 Tendinitis 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia