
 Distal renal tubular acidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Distal renal tubular acidosis is a disease that occurs when the kidneys do not properly remove acids from the blood into the urine. As a result, too much acid remains in the blood (called  acidosis ). Causes 
 
 When the body performs its normal functions, it produces acid. If this acid is not removed or neutralized, the blood becomes too acidic. This can lead to  electrolyte  imbalances in the blood. It can also cause problems with normal function of some cells. The kidneys help control the body's acid level by removing acid from the blood and excreting it into the urine. Distal renal tubular acidosis (Type I RTA) is caused by a defect in the kidney tubes that causes acid to build up in the blood. Type I RTA is caused by a variety of conditions, including: Amyloidosis , a buildup of abnormal protein, called amyloid, in the tissues and organs Fabry disease, an abnormal buildup in the body of a certain type of fatty substance High level of calcium in the blood Sickle cell disease , red blood cells that are normally shaped like a disk take on a sickle or crescent shape Sjögren syndrome , an autoimmune disorder in which the glands that produce tears and saliva are destroyed Systemic lupus erythematosus , an autoimmune disease in which the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue Wilson disease , an inherited disorder in which there is too much copper in the body's tissues Use of certain medicines, such as amphotericin B, lithium, and analgesics Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of distal renal tubular acidosis include any of the following:  Confusion  or  decreased alertness Fatigue Impaired growth in children Increased breathing rate Kidney stones Nephrocalcinosis  (too much calcium deposited in the kidneys) Osteomalacia  (softening of the bones) Muscle weakness  Other symptoms may include: Bone pain Decreased urine output Increased  heart rate  or  irregular heartbeat Muscle cramps Pain in the back, flank, or abdomen Skeletal abnormalities Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gas Blood chemistry Urine pH  and  acid-loading test Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 The goal is to restore normal acid level and electrolyte balance in the body. This will help correct bone disorders and reduce calcium buildup in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis) and kidney stones.  The underlying cause of distal renal tubular acidosis should be corrected if it can be identified. Medicines that may be prescribed include potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate. These are alkaline medicines that help correct the acidic condition of the body. Sodium bicarbonate may correct the loss of potassium and calcium. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disorder must be treated to reduce its effects and complications, which can be permanent or life threatening. Most cases get better with treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of distal renal tubular acidosis. Get medical help right away if you develop emergency symptoms such as: Decreased consciousness Seizures Severe  decrease in alertness  or  orientation Prevention 
 
 There is no prevention for this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Renal tubular acidosis - distal; Renal tubular acidosis type I; Type I RTA; RTA - distal; Classical RTA Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 Krapf R, Seldin DW, Alpern RJ. Clinical syndromes of metabolic acidosis. In: Alpern RJ, Caplan M, Moe OW, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 59. Sreedharan R, Avner ED. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme, JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 529. Read More 
 
 Calcium blood test 
 Kidney stones 
 Low potassium level 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 Osteomalacia 
 Respiratory alkalosis 
 Rickets 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Walead Latif DO, nephrologist, Medical Director of Fresenius Vascular Care, and Clinical Assistant Professor of Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia