
 Donovanosis (granuloma inguinale) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Donovanosis (granuloma inguinale) is a sexually transmitted disease that is rarely seen in the United States. Causes 
 
 Donovanosis (granuloma inguinale) is caused by the bacteria  Klebsiella  granulomatis . The disease is commonly found in tropical and subtropical areas such as southeast India, Guyana, and New Guinea. There are about 100 cases reported per year in the United States. Most of these cases occur in people who have traveled to or are from places where the disease is common. The disease spreads mostly through vaginal or anal intercourse. Very rarely, it spreads during oral sex. Men are affected more than twice as often as women. Most infections occur in people ages 20 to 40. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can occur 1 to 12 weeks after coming in contact with the bacteria that cause the disease. About one half of infected men and women have sores in the anal area. Small, beefy-red bumps appear on the genitals or around the anus. The skin gradually wears away, and the bumps turn into raised, beefy-red, velvety  nodules  called granulation tissue. They are often painless, but they bleed easily if injured. The disease slowly spreads and destroys genital tissue. Tissue damage may spread to the groin. The genitals and the skin around them lose skin color. In its early stages, it may be hard to tell the difference between donovanosis and  chancroid . In the later stages, donovanosis may look like advanced genital cancers,  lymphogranuloma venereum , and anogenital cutaneous  amebiasis . Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Culture of tissue sample  (hard to do and not routinely available) Scrapings or biopsy of lesion  Laboratory tests, such as those used to detect syphilis, are available only on a research basis for diagnosing donovanosis. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to treat donovanosis. These may include azithromycin, doxycycline, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. To cure the condition, long-term treatment is needed. Most treatment courses run 3 weeks or until the sores have completely healed. A follow-up examination is important because the disease can reappear after it seems to be cured. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treating this disease early decreases the chances of tissue damage or scarring. Untreated disease leads to damage of the genital tissue. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from this disease include: Genital damage and scarring Loss of skin color in genital area Permanent genital swelling due to scarring When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: You have had sexual contact with a person who is known to have donovanosis You develop symptoms of donovanosis You develop an ulcer in the genital area Prevention 
 
 Avoiding all sexual activity is the only absolute way to prevent a sexually transmitted disease such as donovanosis. However, safer sex behaviors may reduce your risk. The proper use of condoms, either the male or female type, greatly decreases the risk of catching a sexually transmitted disease. You need to wear the condom from the beginning to the end of each sexual activity. Alternative Names 
 
 Granuloma inguinale; Sexually transmitted disease – donovanosis; STD - donovanosis; Sexually transmitted infection – donovanosis; STI - donovanosis Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Ballard RC.  Klebsiella granulomatis  (donovanosis, granuloma inguinale). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 237. Richens J. Granuloma inguinale. In: Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET, eds.  Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 52. Read More 
 
 Subcutaneous 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia