
 Doppler ultrasound exam of an arm or leg 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This test uses  ultrasound  to look at the blood flow in the large arteries and veins in the arms and legs. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in the ultrasound or radiology department or in a peripheral vascular lab. During the exam:  A water-soluble gel is placed on a handheld device called a transducer. This device directs high-frequency sound waves to the artery or veins being tested. Blood pressure cuffs may be put around different parts of the body, including the thigh, calf, ankle, and different points along the arm. A paste is applied to the skin over the arteries being examined. Images are created as the transducer is moved over each area.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will need to remove clothes from the arm or leg being examined. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Sometimes the person performing the test will need to press on the vein to make sure it does not have a clot. Some people may feel slight pain. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done as the first step to look at arteries and veins. Sometimes  arteriography  and  venography  may be needed later. The test is done to help diagnose: Arteriosclerosis of the arms or legs Blood clot  (deep vein thrombosis) Venous insufficiency The test may also be used to: Look at injury to the arteries  Monitor arterial reconstruction and bypass grafts Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means the blood vessels show no signs of narrowing, clots, or closure, and the arteries have normal blood flow. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Blockage in an artery by a blood clot  Blood clot in a vein (DVT) Narrowing or widening of an artery Spastic arterial disease (arterial contractions brought on by cold or emotion) Venous occlusion (closing of a vein)  Venous reflux (blood flow going the wrong direction in veins) Arterial occlusion from atherosclerosis This test may also be done to help assess the following conditions: Arteriosclerosis of the extremities Deep venous thrombosis Superficial thrombophlebitis Risks 
 
 There are no risks from this procedure. Considerations 
 
 Cigarette smoking may alter the results of this test. Nicotine can cause the arteries in the extremities to constrict. Quitting smoking lowers the risk of problems with the heart and circulatory system. Most smoking-related deaths are caused by cardiovascular problems, not lung cancer. Alternative Names 
 
 Peripheral vascular disease - Doppler; PVD - Doppler; PAD - Doppler; Blockage of leg arteries - Doppler; Intermittent claudication - Doppler; Arterial insufficiency of the legs - Doppler; Leg pain and cramping - Doppler; Calf pain - Doppler Images 
 
 
 Doppler ultrasonography of an extremity 
 References 
 
 Cosgrove DO, Eckersley RJ, Harvey CJ, Lim A. Ultrasound. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 3. Creager MA, Libby P. Peripheral artery diseases.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 58. Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S, et al. Management of patients with peripheral artery disease (compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline Recommendations): a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61(14):1555-1570. PMID: 23473760  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23473760 . Read More 
 
 Aortic dissection 
 Arterial embolism 
 Blood clots 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Peripheral artery disease - legs 
 Superficial thrombophlebitis 
 SVC obstruction 
 Thromboangiitis obliterans 
 Ultrasound 
 Venous insufficiency 
 
 Review Date 4/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia