
 Down syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Down syndrome is a genetic condition in which a person has 47  chromosomes  instead of the usual 46.  Causes 
 
 In most cases, Down syndrome occurs when there is an extra copy of chromosome 21. This form of Down syndrome is called trisomy 21. The extra chromosome causes problems with the way the body and brain develop. Down syndrome is one of the most common causes of birth defects. Symptoms 
 
 Down syndrome symptoms vary from person to person and can range from mild to severe. No matter how severe the condition, people with Down syndrome have a widely-recognized appearance. The head may be smaller than normal and abnormally shaped. For example, the head may be round with a flat area on the back. The inner corner of the eyes may be rounded instead of pointed. Common physical signs include: Decreased muscle tone  at birth Excess skin at the nape of the neck Flattened nose Separated joints between the bones of the skull (sutures) Single crease in the palm of the hand Small ears Small mouth Upward slanting eyes Wide, short hands with short fingers White spots on the colored part of the eye (Brushfield spots) Physical development is often slower than normal. Most children with Down syndrome never reach average adult height. Children may also have delayed mental and social development. Common problems may include: Impulsive behavior Poor judgment Short attention span Slow learning As children with Down syndrome grow and become aware of their limitations, they may also feel frustration and anger. Many different medical conditions are seen in people with Down syndrome, including: Birth defects involving the heart, such as an  atrial septal defect  or  ventricular septal defect Dementia  may be seen Eye problems, such as  cataracts  (most children with Down syndrome need glasses) Early and massive vomiting, which may be a sign of a gastrointestinal blockage, such as  esophageal atresia  and  duodenal atresia Hearing problems, probably caused by repeated ear infections Hip problems and risk of  dislocation Long-term (chronic)  constipation  problems Sleep apnea  (because the mouth, throat, and airway are narrowed in children with Down syndrome) Teeth that appear later than normal and in a location that may cause problems with chewing Underactive thyroid ( hypothyroidism ) Exams and Tests 
 
 A doctor can often make a diagnosis of Down syndrome at birth based on how the baby looks. The doctor may hear a  heart murmur  when listening to the baby's chest with a stethoscope. A  blood test  can be done to check for the extra chromosome and confirm the diagnosis.
  Other tests that may be done include: Echocardiogram  to check for heart defects (usually done soon after birth) ECG X-rays  of the chest and gastrointestinal tract People with Down syndrome need to be closely screened for certain medical conditions. They should have: Eye exam every year during infancy Hearing tests every 6 to 12 months, depending on age Dental exams every 6 months X-rays of the upper or cervical spine between ages 3 and 5 years Pap smears  and pelvic exams beginning during puberty or by age 21 Thyroid testing every 12 months Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for Down syndrome. A child born with a gastrointestinal blockage may need major surgery immediately after birth. Certain heart defects may also require surgery. When breast-feeding, the baby should be well supported and fully awake. The baby may have some leakage because of poor tongue control. But many infants with Down syndrome can successfully breast-feed. Obesity can become a problem for older children and adults. Getting plenty of activity and avoiding high-calorie foods are important. Before beginning sports activities, the child's neck and hips should be examined. Behavioral training can help people with Down syndrome and their families deal with the frustration, anger, and compulsive behavior that often occur. Parents and caregivers should learn to help a person with Down syndrome deal with frustration. At the same time, it is important to encourage independence. Teen girls and women with Down syndrome are usually able to get pregnant. There is an increased risk of sexual abuse and other types of abuse in both males and females. It is important for those with Down syndrome to: Be taught about pregnancy and taking the proper precautions Learn to advocate for themselves in difficult situations Be in a safe environment If the person has any heart defects or other heart problems, antibiotics may need to be prescribed to prevent a heart infection called  endocarditis . Special education and training is offered in most communities for children with delays in mental development. Speech therapy may help improve language skills. Physical therapy may teach movement skills. Occupational therapy may help with feeding and performing tasks. Mental health care can help both parents and the child manage mood or behavior problems. Special educators are also often needed. Support Groups 
 
 National Down Syndrome Society --  www.ndss.org National Down Syndrome Congress --  www.ndsccenter.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Although many children with Down syndrome have physical and mental limitations, they can live independent and productive lives well into adulthood. About half of children with Down syndrome are born with heart problems, including atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, and endocardial cushion defects. Severe heart problems may lead to early death. People with Down syndrome have an increased risk of certain types of leukemia, which can also cause early death. The level of intellectual disability varies, but is usually moderate. Adults with Down syndrome have an increased risk of dementia. Possible Complications 
 
 Airway blockage during sleep Compression injury of the spinal cord 
  Endocarditis
   Eye problems Frequent  ear infections  and increased risk of other infections Hearing loss Heart problems Gastrointestinal blockage Weakness of the back bones at the top of the neck When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 A health care provider should be consulted to determine if the child needs special education and training. It is important for the child to have regular check ups with a doctor. Prevention 
 
 Experts recommend genetic counseling for persons with a family history of Down syndrome who wish to have a baby. A woman's risk of having a child with Down syndrome increases as she gets older. The risk is significantly higher among women age 35 and older. Couples who already have a baby with Down syndrome have an increased risk of having another baby with the condition. Tests such as nuchal translucency ultrasound,  amniocentesis , or  chorionic villus sampling  can be done on a fetus during the first few months of pregnancy to check for Down syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Trisomy 21 References 
 
 Bacino CA, Lee B. Cytogenetics. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 81. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Facts about Down syndrome. Updated October 20, 2014.  www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/downsyndrome.html . Accessed on April 28, 2015. Simpson JL, Holzgreve W, Driscoll DA. Genetic counseling and genetic screening. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 10. 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Down Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia