
 Doxepin overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Doxepin is a type of medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant. It is prescribed to treat depression and anxiety. Doxepin overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. Toxic levels of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) can build up in the body if the TCA and other medicines interact. This interaction can affect how well the body can breakdown, or metabolize, the TCA. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Doxepin Where Found 
 
 These medicines contain doxepin: Adapin Co-Dax Novoxapin Sinequan Triadapin Other medicines may also contain doxepin. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of an overdose of doxepin in different parts of the body: AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Slow breathing Difficulty breathing  BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Hard to start urinating Hard to empty bladder  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Ringing in the ears  HEART AND BLOOD Irregular heartbeat  (may be fatal) Low blood pressure Shock MOUTH, STOMACH, AND INTESTINAL TRACT Constipation Dry mouth Nausea and vomiting Unpleasant taste in mouth  NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Coma Confusion Convulsions Drowsiness Headache Lack of  coordination Muscle rigidity Restlessness Seizures Stupor  (lack of alertness)  SKIN Very sensitive to sunlight  Home Care 
 
 Get medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Catheter (thin, flexible tube) into the bladder if the person cannot urinate on their own Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of medicine they swallowed and how quickly the treatment is received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Tricyclic depressant overdoses are very toxic and difficult to treat. Many people have died from TCA overdose, even with aggressive medical treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Adapin overdose; Novoxapin overdose; Sinequan overdose; Triadapin overdose References 
 
 Ferri FF. Tricyclic antidepressant overdose. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:section I. Levine M, Ruha A-M. Antidepressants. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 151. Mills KC. Tricyclic antidepressants. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 158. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Antidepressants 
 Browse the Encyclopedia