
 Drooling 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drooling is saliva flowing outside the mouth. Considerations 
 
 Drooling is generally caused by: Problems keeping saliva in the mouth Problems with swallowing Too much saliva production  Some people with drooling problems are at increased risk of breathing saliva, food, or fluids into the lungs. This may cause harm if there is a problem with the body's normal reflexes (such as gagging and coughing). Causes 
 
 Some drooling in infants and toddlers is normal. It may occur with teething. Drooling in infants and young children may get worse with colds and allergies. Drooling may happen if your body makes too much saliva. Infections can cause this, including: Mononucleosis Peritonsillar abscess Strep throat Sinus infections Tonsillitis Other conditions that can cause too much saliva are: Allergies Heartburn or GERD (reflux) Poisoning (especially by pesticides) Pregnancy (may be due to pregnancy side effects, such as nausea or reflux) Reaction to snake or insect venom Swollen adenoids Use of certain medicines  Drooling may also be caused by nervous system disorders that make it hard to swallow. Examples are: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS Autism Cerebral palsy (CP) Down syndrome Multiple sclerosis Parkinson disease Stroke  Home Care 
 
 Popsicles or other cold objects (such as frozen bagels) may be helpful for young children who are drooling while teething. Take care to avoid choking when a child uses any of these objects. For those with chronic drooling: Caregivers may try reminding the person to keep lips closed and chin up. Limit sugary foods, because they may increase the amount of saliva. Watch for skin breakdown around the lips and on the chin. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: The cause of the drooling has not been diagnosed. There is concern about gagging or choking. A child has a fever, difficulty breathing, or holds his or her head in a strange position.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. Testing depends on a person's overall health and other symptoms. A speech therapist can determine if the drooling increases the risk of breathing in food or fluids into the lungs. This is called aspiration. This may include information about: How to hold your head Lip and mouth exercises Encourage you to swallow more often  Drooling caused by nervous system problems can often be managed with drugs that reduce saliva production. Different drops, patches, pills or liquid medicines may be tried.  If you have severe drooling, the provider may recommend: Botox shots Radiation to the salivary glands Surgery to remove the salivary glands  Alternative Names 
 
 Salivation; Excessive saliva; Too much saliva; Sialorrhea Images 
 
 
 Drooling 
 References 
 
 Hess JM, Lowell MJ. Esophagus, stomach, duodenum. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 89.
 Marques DR, Carroll WE. Neurology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. Melio FR, Berge LR. Upper respiratory tract infections. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 75. 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Salivary Gland Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia