
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus is an  autoimmune disorder  that is brought on by a reaction to a medicine. Causes 
 
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus is similar to  systemic lupus erythematosus  (SLE). It is an autoimmune disorder. This means your body attacks healthy tissue by mistake. It is caused by an overreaction to a medicine. The most common medicines known to cause drug-induced lupus erythematosus are:  Isoniazid Hydralazine Procainamide  Other less common drugs may also cause the condition. These may include: Anti-seizure medications Capoten Chlorpromazine Tumor-necrosis factor (TNF) alpha inhibitors (such as etanercept, infliximab and adalimumab) Methyldopa Minocycline Penicillamine Quinidine Sulfasalazine  Symptoms tend to occur after taking the drug for at least 3 to 6 months. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Blurred vision Fever General ill feeling (malaise) Joint pain Joint swelling Loss of appetite Pleuritic  chest pain Skin rash  that gets worse with sunlight. (It may appear as a "butterfly" rash across bridge of nose and cheeks.) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and listen to your chest with a stethoscope. The provider may hear a sound called a heart friction rub or pleural friction rub. A skin exam shows a rash. Joints may be swollen and tender. Tests that may be done include: Antihistone antibody Antinuclear antibody (ANA) panel Complete blood count (CBC)  A  chest x-ray  may show signs of pleuritis or pericarditis (inflammation around the lining of the lung or heart). An  ECG  may show that the heart is affected. Treatment 
 
 Most of the time, symptoms go away within several days to weeks after stopping the medicine that caused the condition. Treatment may include: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to treat arthritis and pleurisy Corticosteroid creams to treat skin rashes Antimalarial drugs (hydroxychloroquine) to treat skin and arthritis symptoms If the condition is affecting your heart, kidney, or nervous system, you may be prescribed high doses of corticosteroids (prednisone, methylprednisolone) and immune system suppressants (azathioprine or cyclophosphamide). This is rare. When the disease is active, you should wear protective clothing and sunglasses to guard against too much sun. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, drug-induced lupus erythematosus is not as severe as SLE. The symptoms often go away within a few days to weeks after stopping the medicine you were taking. Rarely, kidney inflammation (nephritis) can develop with drug-induced lupus caused by TNF inhibitors. Nephritis may require treatment with prednisone and immunosuppressive medicines.  Avoid taking the drug that caused the reaction in future. Symptoms are likely to return if you do so. Get regular eye exams to detect any complications early. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Infection Thrombocytopenia  purpura -- bleeding near the skin surface, resulting from a low number of platelets in the blood Hemolytic anemia Myocarditis Pericarditis Nephritis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You develop new symptoms when taking any of the medicines listed above. Your symptoms do not get better after you stop taking the medicine that caused the condition.  Prevention 
 
 Watch for signs of a reaction if you are taking any of the drugs that can cause this problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Lupus - drug induced Images 
 
 
 Lupus, discoid  - view of lesions on the chest 
 Lupus, discoid on a child's face 
 Lupus, discoid on the face 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Callen JP. Drug-induced subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus.  Lupus. 2010 ; 19:1107-11. PMID: 20693204  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20693204 . Patel DR, Richardson BC. Drug-induced lupus. In: Hochberg MC, Stillman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt, ME, and Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatolgy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 132. Wright B, Bharadwaj S, Abelson A. Systemic lupus erythematosus. In: Carey WD, ed.  Cleveland Clinic: Current Clinical Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 13. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Arthritis 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Chronic 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Immune response 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Myocarditis 
 Systemic 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lupus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia