
 Drug-induced hypertension 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced hypertension is  high blood pressure  caused by using a chemical substance, drug, or medication. Causes 
 
 Blood pressure is determined by the: Amount of blood the heart pumps Condition of the heart valves Pulse rate Pumping power of the heart Size and condition of the arteries There are several types of  high blood pressure .  Essential hypertension has no cause that can be found. Secondary hypertension occurs because of another disorder. Drug-induced hypertension is a form of secondary hypertension caused by a response to medication. Drugs that can cause hypertension include: Acetaminophen Alcohol, amphetamines, ecstasy (MDMA and derivatives), and cocaine Antidepressants (including venlafaxine, bupropion, and desipramine) Caffeine (including the caffeine in coffee and energy drinks) Corticosteroids Cyclosporine Erythropoietin Estrogens (including birth control pills) and other hormones Many over-the-counter medications such as cough/cold and  asthma  medications -- particularly when the cough/cold medicine is taken with certain antidepressants like tranylcypromine or tricyclics Migraine medications Nasal decongestants Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)   Rebound hypertension occurs when blood pressure rises after you stop taking or lower the dose of a drug (typically a high blood pressure medication). Many other factors can also affect blood pressure, including: Condition of the kidneys, nervous system, or blood vessels Genetics Foods eaten, weight, and other body-related variables Levels of various hormones in the body Volume of water in the body  Alternative Names 
 
 Hypertension - medication related  Images 
 
 
 Drug induced hypertension 
 Untreated hypertension 
 Hypertension 
 References 
 
 Grossman G, Messerli FH. Drug-induced hypertension: An unappreciated cause of secondary hypertension.  Am J Med . 2012;125:14-22. Victor RG. Systemic hypertension: mechanisms and diagnosis. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Asthma 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Robert Hurd, MD, Professor of Endocrinology and Bioethics at Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 High Blood Pressure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia