
 Dubin-Johnson syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dubin-Johnson syndrome (DJS) is a disorder passed down through families (inherited). In this condition, you may have mild jaundice throughout life. Causes 
 
 DJS is a very rare genetic disorder. In order to inherit the condition, a child must get a copy of the defective gene from both parents. The syndrome interferes with the body's ability to move bilirubin from the liver. When the liver breaks down worn out red blood cells, it produces bilirubin. It normally moves through the bile produced by the liver and into the bile ducts, past the gallbladder, and into the digestive system. When bilirubin is not properly processed, it builds up in the bloodstream. This causes the skin and the whites of the eyes to turn yellow. This is called jaundice. Severely high levels of bilirubin can damage the brain and other organs. People with DJS have lifelong mild jaundice that may be made worse by: Alcohol Birth control pills Environmental factors that affect the liver Infection Pregnancy Symptoms 
 
 Mild jaundice, which may not appear until puberty or adulthood, is most often the only symptom of DJS. Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests can help diagnose this syndrome: Liver biopsy Liver enzyme levels (blood test) Serum bilirubin Urinary coproporphyrin levels Treatment 
 
 No specific treatment is required. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is very positive. DJS generally does not shorten a person's lifespan. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications are unusual, but may include the following: Reduced liver function Severe jaundice When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if any of the following occurs: Jaundice is severe Jaundice gets worse over time You also have  abdominal pain  or other symptoms (which may be a sign that another disorder is causing the jaundice) Prevention 
 
 If you have a family history of DJS, genetic counseling may be helpful if you plan to have children. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Berk PD, Korenblat KM. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver tests. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 147. Lidofsky SD. Jaundice. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 21. 
 Review Date 8/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia