
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy is an inherited disorder. It involves  muscle weakness , which quickly gets worse. Causes 
 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a form of  muscular dystrophy . It worsens quickly. Other muscular dystrophies (including  Becker's muscular dystrophy ) get worse much more slowly. Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by a defective gene for dystrophin (a  protein  in the muscles). However, it often occurs in people without a known family history of the condition. The condition most often affects boys due to the way the disease is inherited. The sons of women who are carriers of the disease (women with a defective gene, but no symptoms themselves) each have a 50% chance of having the disease. The daughters each have a 50% chance of being carriers. Very rarely, a female can be affected by the disease. Duchenne muscular dystrophy occurs in about 1 out of every 3,600 male infants. Because this is an inherited disorder, risks include a family history of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms most often appear before age 6. They may come on as early as infancy. Most boys show no symptoms in the first few years of life. Symptoms may include: Fatigue Learning difficulties (the IQ can be below 75) Intellectual disability (possible, but does not get worse over time)  Muscle weakness: Begins in the legs and pelvis, but also occurs less severely in the arms, neck, and other areas of the body Problems with motor skills (running, hopping, jumping) Frequent falls Trouble getting up from a lying position or climbing stairs Weakness quickly gets worse  Progressive  difficulty walking : Ability to walk may be lost by age 12, and the child will have to use a wheelchair. Breathing difficulties and heart disease usually start by age 20.  Exams and Tests 
 
 A complete nervous system (neurological), heart, lung, and muscle exam may show: Abnormal heart muscle ( cardiomyopathy ) Congestive heart failure  or irregular heart rhythm ( arrhythmia ) Deformities of the chest and back ( scoliosis ) Enlarged muscles of the calves, buttocks, and shoulders (around age 4 or 5). These muscles are eventually replaced by fat and connective tissue (pseudohypertrophy). Loss of muscle mass ( wasting ) Muscle contractures  in the heels, legs Muscle deformities Respiratory disorders, including  pneumonia  and swallowing with food or fluid passing into the lungs (in late stages of the disease)  Tests may include: Electromyography ( EMG ) Genetic tests Muscle biopsy Serum CPK Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Treatment aims to control symptoms to improve quality of life.  Steroid drugs can slow the loss of muscle strength. They may be started when the child is diagnosed or when muscle strength begins to decline. Other treatments may include: Albuterol, a drug used for people with asthma Amino acids Carnitine Coenzyme Q10 Creatine Fish oil Green tea extracts Vitamin E  However, the effects of these treatments have not been proven. Stem cells and gene therapy may be used in the future. The use of steroids and the lack of physical activity can lead to excessive weight gain. Activity is encouraged. Inactivity (such as bedrest) can make the muscle disease worse. Physical therapy may help to maintain muscle strength and function. Speech therapy is often needed. Other treatments may include: Assisted ventilation (used during the day or night) Drugs to help heart function, such as angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, beta blockers, and diuretics Orthopedic appliances (such as braces and wheelchairs) to improve mobility Proton pump inhibitors (for people with gastroesophageal reflux)  Several new treatments are being studied in trials. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the  stress  of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. The  Muscular Dystrophy Association  is an excellent source of information on this disease. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy leads to progressively worsening disability. Death often occurs by age 25, typically from lung disorders. However, advances in supportive care have resulted in many men living much longer than this. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cardiomyopathy (can also occur in female carriers, who should also be screened) Congestive heart failure (rare) Deformities Heart arrhythmias (rare) Mental impairment (varies, usually minimal) Permanent, progressive disability, including decreased mobility and decreased ability to care for self Pneumonia or other respiratory infections Respiratory failure  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your child has symptoms of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Symptoms get worse or new symptoms develop, particularly fever with cough or breathing problems.  Prevention 
 
 People with a family history of the disorder may want to seek genetic counseling. Genetic studies done during pregnancy are very accurate in detecting Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy; Muscular dystrophy - Duchenne type Images 
 
 
 X-linked recessive genetic defects - how boys are affected 
 X-linked recessive genetic defects 
 References 
 
 Muscular Dystrophy Association.  www.mda.org/disease/duchenne-muscular-dystrophy . Accessed January 21, 2016. Sarnat HB. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 609. Warner WC, Sawyer JR. Neuromuscular disorders. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics.  12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 35. Read More 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Muscle atrophy 
 Muscle cramps 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Protein in diet 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscular Dystrophy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia