
 Duplex ultrasound  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A duplex  ultrasound  is a test to see how blood moves through your arteries and veins. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A duplex ultrasound combines: Traditional ultrasound: This uses sound waves that bounce off blood vessels to create pictures. Doppler ultrasound: This records sound waves reflecting off moving objects, such as blood, to measure their speed and other aspects of how they flow. There are different types of duplex ultrasound exams. Some include: Arterial and venous duplex ultrasound of the abdomen. This test examines blood vessels and blood flow in the abdominal area. Carotid duplex ultrasound  looks at the carotid artery in the neck. Duplex ultrasound of the extremities  looks at the arms or legs. Renal duplex ultrasound examines the kidneys and their blood vessels. You may need to wear a medical gown. You will lie down on a table, and the ultrasound technician will spread a gel over the area being tested. The gel helps the sound waves get into your tissues. A wand, called a transducer, is moved over the area being tested. This wand sends out the sound waves. A computer measures how the sound waves reflect back, and changes the sound waves into pictures. The Doppler creates a "swishing" sound, which is the sound of your blood moving through the arteries and veins. You need to stay still during the exam. You may be asked to lie in different body positions, or to take a deep breath and hold it.  Sometimes during a  duplex ultrasound of the legs , the health care provider may calculate an ankle-brachial (ABI) index. You will need to wear blood pressure cuffs on your arms and legs for this test. The ABI number is obtained by dividing the blood pressure in the ankle by the blood pressure in the arm. A value of 0.9 or greater is normal. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Usually, there is no preparation for this test. If you are having an ultrasound of your stomach area, you may be asked not to eat or drink after midnight. Tell the person doing the ultrasound exam if you are taking any medicines, such as blood thinners. These might affect the results of the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel some pressure as the wand is moved over the body, but there is no discomfort most of the time. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A duplex ultrasound can show how blood flows to many parts of the body. It can also tell the width of a blood vessel and reveal any blockages. This test is a less invasive option than arteriography and  venography . A duplex ultrasound can help diagnose the following conditions: Abdominal aneurysm Arterial occlusion Blood clot Carotid occlusive disease (See:  Carotid duplex ) Renal vascular disease Varicose veins Venous insufficiency A renal duplex ultrasound can also be used after transplant surgery. This shows how well a new kidney is working. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result is normal blood flow through the veins and arteries. There is normal blood pressure and no sign of a narrowing or blockage of a blood vessel. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result depends on the specific area being examined. An abnormal result may be due to a blood clot or plaque buildup in a blood vessel. Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 Smoking may change the results of an ultrasound of the arms and legs. This happens because nicotine can cause the arteries to shrink (constrict). Alternative Names 
 
 Vascular ultrasound; Peripheral vascular ultrasound Images 
 
 
 Duplex/doppler ultrasound test 
 References 
 
 Goldstein LB. Approach to cerebrovascular diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 406. Leon LR, Labropoulos N. Vascular laboratory. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 18. Stone PA, Hass SM. Vascular laboratory. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Angioplasty and stent placement -- peripheral arteries 
 Arterial embolism 
 Blood clots 
 Doppler ultrasound exam of an arm or leg 
 Ultrasound 
 Venous insufficiency 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Angioplasty and stent placement - peripheral arteries - discharge  
 Deep vein thrombosis - discharge 
 Review Date 6/6/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, RPVI, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Ultrasound 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia