
 Ear tube insertion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ear tube insertion involves placing tubes through the eardrums. The eardrum is the thin layer of tissue that separates the outer and middle ear.   
 Note: This article focuses on ear tube insertion in children. However, most of the information could also apply to adults with similar symptoms or problems. Description 
 
 While the child is asleep and pain-free ( general anesthesia ), a small surgical cut is made in the eardrum. Any fluid that has collected behind the eardrum is removed with suction through this cut. Then, a small tube is placed through the cut in the eardrum. The tube allows air to flow in so that pressure is the same on both sides of the eardrum. Also, trapped fluid can flow out of the middle ear. This prevents hearing loss and reduces the risk of ear infections. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 The  buildup of fluid behind your child's eardrum  may cause some hearing loss. But most children DO NOT have long-term damage to their hearing or speech, even when the fluid is there for many months.  Ear tube insertion may be done when fluid builds up behind your child's eardrum and: Does not go away after 3 months and both ears are affected Does not go away after 6 months and fluid is only in 1 ear Ear infections  that DO NOT go away with treatment or that keep coming back are also reasons for placing an ear tube. If an infection does not go away with treatment, or if a child has many ear infections over a short period of time, the doctor may recommend ear tubes. Ear tubes are also sometimes used for people of any age who have: A severe ear infection that spreads to nearby bones (mastoiditis) or the brain, or that damages nearby nerves Injury to the ear after sudden changes in pressure from flying or deep sea diving Risks 
 
 Risks of ear tube insertion include: Drainage from the ear . Hole in the eardrum that does not heal after the tube falls out. Most of the time, these problems DO NOT last long. They also DO NOT often cause problems in children. Your health care provider can explain these complications in more detail. The risks for any anesthesia are: Breathing problems Reactions to medicines  The risks for any surgery are: Bleeding Infection  Before the Procedure 
 
 Your child's ear provider may ask for a medical history and physical exam of your child before the procedure is done. A hearing test is also recommended before the procedure is done. Always tell your child's provider: What drugs your child is taking, including drugs, herbs, and vitamins you bought without a prescription. What allergies your child may have to any medicines, latex, tape, or skin cleaner.  On the day of the surgery: Your child may be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before the surgery. Give your child a small sip of water with any drugs you have been told to give your child. Your child's provider will tell you when to arrive at the hospital. The provider will make sure your child is healthy enough for surgery. This means your child has no signs of illness or infection. If your child is ill, the surgery may be delayed.  After the Procedure 
 
 Children most often stay in the recovery room for a short time and leave the hospital the same day as the ear tubes are inserted. Your child may be groggy and fussy for an hour or so while waking up from anesthesia. Your child's provider may prescribe ear drops or antibiotics for a few days after the surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After this procedure, most parents report that their children: Have fewer ear infections Recover more quickly from infections  If the tubes DO NOT fall out on their own in a few years, an ear specialist may have to remove them. If ear infections return after the tubes fall out, another set of ear tubes can be inserted. Alternative Names 
 
 Myringotomy; Tympanostomy; Ear tube surgery; Pressure equalization tubes; Ventilating tubes; Otitis - tubes; Ear infection - tubes; Otitis media - tubes Images 
 
 
 Ear tube insertion  - series 
 References 
 
 Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Otitis externa, otitis media, and mastoiditis. In: Klein JO, ed.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62.  Casselbrant ML, Mandel EM. Acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 195. Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF. Otitis media. In: Kerschner JE, Preciado D, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 640. Rosenfeld RM, Schwartz SR, Pynnonen MA, et al. Clinical practice guideline: tympanostomy tubes in children.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2013;149(1 Suppl):S1-35. PMID: 23818543  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23818543 . van Dongen TM, van der Heijden GJ, Venekamp RP, Rovers MM, Schilder AG. A trial of treatment for acute otorrhea in children with tympanostomy tubes.  N Engl J Med . 2014;370(8):723-733. PMID: 24552319  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24552319 . Wallace IF, Berkman ND, Lohr KN, Harrison MF, Kimple AJ, Steiner MJ. Surgical treatments for otitis media with effusion: a systematic review.  Pediatrics . 2014;133(2):296-311. PMID: 24394689  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24394689 . Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Earache 
 Ear barotrauma 
 Ear discharge 
 Hearing loss 
 Otitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ear tube surgery - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia