
 Ear examination 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An ear exam is performed when a health care provider looks inside your ear using an instrument called an otoscope. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider may dim the lights in the room. A young child will be asked to lie on his or her back with the head turned to the side, or the child's head may rest against an adult's chest. Older children and adults may sit with the head tilted toward the shoulder opposite the ear being examined. The provider will gently pull up, back, or forward on the ear to straighten the ear canal. Then, the tip of the otoscope will be placed gently into your ear. A light beam shines through the otoscope into the ear canal. The provider will carefully move the scope in different directions to see the inside of the ear and eardrum. Sometimes, this view may be blocked by earwax. An ear specialist may use a binocular microscope to get a magnified look at the ear.  The otoscope may have a plastic bulb on it, which delivers a tiny puff of air into the outer ear canal when pressed. This is done to see how the eardrum moves. Decreased movement can mean that there is fluid in the middle ear. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No preparation is needed for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 If there is an ear infection, there may be some discomfort or pain. The provider will stop the test if the pain worsens. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 An ear exam may be done if you have an earache,  ear infection ,  hearing loss , or other ear symptoms. Examining the ear also helps the provider see if treatment for an ear problem is working. Normal Results 
 
 The ear canal differs in size, shape, and color from person to person. Normally, the canal is skin-colored and has small hairs. Yellowish-brown earwax may be present. The eardrum is a light-gray color or a shiny pearly-white. Light should reflect off the eardrum surface. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Ear infections are a common problem, especially with small children. A dull or absent light reflex from the eardrum may be a sign of a middle ear infection or fluid. The eardrum may be red and bulging if there is an infection. Amber liquid or bubbles behind the eardrum are often seen if fluid collects in the middle ear. Abnormal results may also be due to an  external ear infection . You might feel pain when the outer ear is pulled or wiggled. The ear canal may be red, tender, swollen, or filled with yellowish-green pus. The test may also be done for the following conditions:  Cholesteatoma External ear infection - chronic Head injury Ruptured or perforated eardrum Risks 
 
 An infection can be spread from one ear to the other if the instrument used to look inside the ear has not been cleaned well.  Considerations 
 
 Not all ear problems can be detected by looking through an otoscope. Other ear and hearing tests may be needed. Otoscopes sold for at-home use are lower quality than the ones used at the health care provider's office. Parents may not be able to recognize some of the subtle signs of an ear problem. See a provider if there are symptoms of:  Severe ear pain Hearing loss Dizziness Fever Ringing in the ears Ear discharge or bleeding Alternative Names 
 
 Otoscopy
 Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Medical findings based on ear anatomy 
 Otoscopic exam of the ear 
 References 
 
 King EF, Couch ME. History, physical examination, and the preoperative evaluation. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 4. Murr AH. Approach to the patient with nose, sinus, and ear disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 434. Read More 
 
 Cholesteatoma 
 Earache 
 Ear infection - acute 
 Fever 
 Hearing loss 
 Otitis 
 Ruptured eardrum 
 Swimmer's ear  
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Alan Lipkin, MD, otolaryngologist, private practice, Denver, CO. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Disorders 
 Ear Infections 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Hearing Problems in Children 
 Browse the Encyclopedia