
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome is a form of Cushing syndrome in which a tumor outside the pituitary gland produces a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Causes 
 
 Cushing syndrome  is a disorder that occurs when your body has a higher than normal level of the hormone cortisol. This hormone is made in the  adrenal glands . Too much cortisol can be due to various problems. One such problem is called  Cushing disease . It occurs when the pituitary gland makes too much of the hormone ACTH. ACTH then signals the adrenal glands to produce too much cortisol. Ectopic Cushing syndrome, on the other hand, occurs when ACTH is produced somewhere other than the pituitary gland. Ectopic means occurring in an abnormal place. Ectopic Cushing syndrome is caused by  tumors  that release ACTH. Tumors that can, in rare cases, release ACTH include: Benign carcinoid tumors of the lung Islet cell tumors  of the pancreas Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid Small cell tumors of the lung Tumors of the thymus gland  Symptoms 
 
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome tends to have fewer symptoms than classic Cushing syndrome. Most people with Cushing syndrome have: Round, red, and full face ( moon face ) Slow growth rate in children Weight gain with fat accumulation on the trunk, but fat loss from the arms, legs, and buttocks (central  obesity )  Skin changes that are often seen: Skin infections Purple marks (1/2 inch 1 centimeter or more wide) called  striae  on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, and breasts Thin skin with easy bruising  Muscle and bone changes include: Backache, which occurs with routine activities Bone pain or tenderness Collection of fat between the shoulders and above the collar bone Rib and spine fractures caused by  thinning of the bones Weak muscles, especially of the hips and shoulders  Women may have: Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs Periods that become irregular or stop  Men may have:  Decreased or no desire for sex Impotence Other symptoms that may occur include:  
 Mental changes, such as depression, anxiety, or changes in behavior Fatigue Headache Increased  thirst  and  urination Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.  Tests that may be done include: 24-hour urine sample to measure cortisol and  creatinine  levels Blood tests to check ACTH,  cortisol , and  potassium  levels Dexamethasone suppression test Fasting glucose MRI  and high resolution  CT scans  to find the tumor  Treatment 
 
 The best treatment for ectopic Cushing syndrome is surgery to remove the tumor. Surgery is usually possible when the tumor is noncancerous ( benign ). In some cases, the tumor is cancerous and spreads to other areas of the body before the doctor can discover the problem with cortisol production. Surgery may not be possible in these cases. But the doctor may prescribe medicines to block cortisol production. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Surgery to remove the tumor may lead to full recovery. But there is a chance that the tumor will come back. Possible Complications 
 
 The tumor may spread or return after surgery. A high cortisol level may continue. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of tumors may reduce the risk in some cases. Many cases are not preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Cushing syndrome - ectopic; Ectopic ACTH syndrome Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Cushing's disease and syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:385-386. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. Treatment of Cushing's syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100:2807-2831. PMID 26222757  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26222757 . Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 ACTH blood test 
 Adrenal glands 
 Asthma 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Pancreatic islet cell tumor 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cushing's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia