
 EGD - esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is a test to examine the lining of the esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. How the Test is Performed 
 
 EGD is done in a hospital or medical center. The procedure uses an endoscope. This is a flexible tube with a light and camera at the end. The procedure is done as follows: You receive  medicine into a vein to help you relax . You should feel no pain and not remember the procedure. A local anesthetic may be sprayed into your mouth to prevent you from coughing or gagging when the scope is inserted. A mouth guard is used to protect your teeth and the scope. Dentures must be removed before the procedure begins. You then lie on your left side. The scope is inserted through the esophagus (food pipe) to the stomach and  duodenum . Air is put through the scope to make it easier for the doctor to see. The lining of the esophagus, stomach, and upper duodenum is examined.  Biopsies  can be taken through the scope. Biopsies are tissue samples that are looked at under the microscope. Different treatments may be done, such as stretching or widening a narrowed area of the esophagus.  After the test is finished, you will not be able to have food and liquid until your gag reflex returns (so you do not choke). The test lasts about 5 to 20 minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will not be able to eat anything for 6 to 12 hours before the test. Follow instructions about stopping aspirin and other blood-thinning medicines before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The anesthetic spray makes it hard to swallow. This wears off shortly after the procedure. The scope may make you gag.  You may feel gas and the movement of the scope in your abdomen. You will not be able to feel the biopsy. Because of sedation, you may not feel any discomfort and have no memory of the test. You may feel bloated from the air that was put into your body. This feeling soon wears off. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 EGD may be done if you have symptoms that are new, cannot be explained, or are not responding to treatment, such as: Black or tarry stools or  vomiting blood Bringing food back up (regurgitation) Feeling full sooner than normal or after eating less than usual Feeling like food is stuck behind the breastbone Heartburn Low blood count ( anemia ) that cannot be explained Pain or discomfort in the upper abdomen Swallowing problems or pain with swallowing Weight loss that cannot be explained Nausea or vomiting that does not go away  Your doctor may also order this test if you: Have  cirrhosis  of the liver, to look for swollen veins (called varices) in the walls of the lower part of the esophagus, which may begin to bleed Have  Crohn disease Need more follow-up or treatment for a condition that has been diagnosed  The test may also be used to take a piece of tissue for biopsy. Normal Results 
 
 The esophagus, stomach, and duodenum should be smooth and of normal color. There should be no bleeding, growths, ulcers, or inflammation. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal EGD may be the result of: Celiac disease Esophageal rings Esophageal varices (swollen veins in the lining of the esophagus caused by  liver cirrhosis ) Esophagitis  (lining of the esophagus becomes inflamed or swollen) Gastritis  (lining of the stomach and duodenum is inflamed or swollen) Gastroesophageal reflux disease  (a condition in which food or liquid from the stomach leaks backwards into the esophagus) Hiatal hernia  (a condition in which part of the stomach sticks up into the chest through an opening in the diaphragm) Mallory-Weiss syndrome  (tear in the esophagus) Narrowing of the esophagus Tumors or cancer in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum (first part of small intestine) Ulcers , gastric (stomach) or duodenal (small intestine)  Risks 
 
 There is a small chance of a hole (perforation) in the stomach, duodenum, or esophagus from the scope moving through these areas. There is also a small risk of bleeding at the biopsy site.  You could have a reaction to the medicine used during the procedure, which could cause: Apnea  (not breathing) Difficulty breathing  (respiratory depression) Excessive sweating Low blood pressure ( hypotension ) Slow heartbeat ( bradycardia ) Spasm of the larynx (laryngospasm) Alternative Names 
 
 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy; Upper endoscopy; Gastroscopy Images 
 
 
 Gastric endoscopy 
 References 
 
 Vargo JJ. Preparation for and complications of GI endoscopy. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Anti-reflux surgery - children 
 Chronic 
 Diverticulitis 
 Esophagitis 
 Lower esophageal ring 
 Mallory-Weiss tear 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gastroesophageal reflux - discharge 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endoscopy 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia