
 ELISA 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 ELISA stands for enzyme-linked immunoassay. It is a commonly used laboratory test to detect  antibodies  in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand. The sample is sent to a laboratory where the targeted antibody or  antigen  is linked to a specific  enzyme . If the target substance is in the sample, the test solution turns a different color. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is often used to see if you have been exposed to viruses or other substances that cause infection. It is also used to screen for current or past infections. Normal Results 
 
 Normal values depend on the type of substance being identified. Some laboratories use different measurements or test different samples. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal values depend on the type of substance being identified. In some people, a positive result may be normal. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Enzyme-linked immunoassay; EIA Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Ashihara Y, Kasahara Y, Nakamura RM. Immunoassay and immunochemistry. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Antigen 
 Enzyme 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Viral Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia