
 Ellis-van Creveld syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ellis-van Creveld syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that affects bone growth. Causes 
 
 Ellis-van Creveld is passed down through families (inherited). It is caused by defects in 1 of 2 Ellis-van Creveld syndrome genes ( EVC  and  EVC2 ). These genes are positioned next to each other on the same chromosome. The severity of the disease varies from person to person. The highest rate of the condition is seen among the Old Order Amish population of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. It is fairly rare in the general population. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Cleft lip or palate Epispadias  or  undescended testicle  (cryptorchidism) Extra fingers ( polydactyly ) Limited range of motion Nail problems , including missing or deformed nails Short arms and legs, especially forearm and lower leg Short height, between 3 1/2 to 5 feet (1 to 1.5 meters) tall Sparse, absent, or fine textured hair Tooth abnormalities, such as  peg teeth ,  widely-spaced teeth Teeth present at birth ( natal teeth ) Delayed or missing teeth Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs of this condition include: Growth hormone deficiency Heart defects, such as a hole in the heart ( atrial septal defect ), occur in about half of all cases Tests include: Chest x-ray Echocardiogram Genetic testing may be performed for mutations in 1 of the 2 EVC genes Skeletal  x-ray Ultrasound Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on which body system is affected and the severity of the problem. The condition itself is not treatable, but many of the complications can be treated. Support Groups 
 
 Many communities have EVC support groups. Ask your health care provider or local hospital if there is one in your area. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many babies with this condition die in early infancy. Most often this is due to a small chest or heart defect.  Stillbirth  is common. The outcome depends on which body system is involved and to what extent that body system is involved. Like many genetic conditions involving bones or the physical structure, intelligence is normal. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bone abnormalities Breathing difficulty Congenital heart disease  (CHD) especially  atrial septal defect  (ASD) Kidney disease When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child has symptoms of this syndrome. If you have a family history of EVC syndrome and your child has any symptoms, visit your provider. Genetic counseling can help families understand the condition and how to care for the person. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for prospective parents from a high-risk group, or who have a family history of EVC syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Chondroectodermal dysplasia; EVC Images 
 
 
 Polydactyly - an infant's hand 
 Chromosomes and DNA 
 References 
 
 Horton WA, Hecht JT. Disorders for which defects are poorly understood or unknown. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 700. Read More 
 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Congenital heart disease 
 Growth hormone deficiency - children 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dwarfism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia