
 Emergency airway puncture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Emergency airway puncture is the placement of a hollow needle through the throat into the airway. It is done to treat life-threatening choking. Description 
 
 Emergency airway puncture is done in an emergency situation, when someone is  choking  and all other efforts to assist with breathing have failed. A hollow needle or tube can be inserted into the throat, just below the Adam's apple (cricoid cartilage), into the airway. In a hospital, a small cut in the skin is made before inserting the needle. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 A cricothyrotomy is an emergency procedure to relieve an  airway obstruction  until surgery can be done to place a breathing tube ( tracheostomy ). If the airway blockage occurs with trauma to the head, neck, or spine, care must be taken to avoid further injury to the patient. Risks 
 
 Risks for this procedure include: Injury to the voice box (larynx), thyroid gland, or esophagus Risks for any surgery are: Bleeding Infection Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the cause of the airway blockage and how quickly the person receives proper breathing support. Emergency airway puncture provides enough breathing support for only a very short period of time. Alternative Names 
 
 Needle cricothyrotomy Images 
 
 
 Emergency airway puncture 
 Cricoid cartilage 
 Emergency airway puncture  - series 
 References 
 
 Hebert RB, Bose S, Mace SE. Cricothyrotomy and percutaneous translaryngeal ventilation. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 6. Thomas SH, Goodloe JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx J, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Abdominal thrusts 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Tracheostomy 
 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Choking 
 Browse the Encyclopedia