
 Empyema 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Empyema is a collection of pus in the space between the lung and the inner surface of the chest wall (pleural space). Causes 
 
 Empyema is usually caused by an infection that spreads from the lung. It leads to a buildup of pus in the pleural space. There can be a pint (1/2 liter) or more of infected fluid. This fluid puts pressure on the lungs. Risk factors include: Bacterial pneumonia Tuberculosis Chest surgery Lung abscess Trauma or injury to the chest  In rare cases, empyema can occur after  thoracentesis . This is a procedure in which a needle is inserted through the chest wall to draw off fluid in the pleural space for medical diagnosis or treatment. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of empyema may include any of the following: Chest pain , which worsens when you breathe in deeply (pleurisy) Dry  cough Excessive sweating , especially night sweats Fever  and chills General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Shortness of breath Weight loss  (unintentional)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may note decreased breath sounds or an abnormal sound (friction rub) when listening to the chest with a stethoscope ( auscultation ). Tests that may be ordered include: Chest x-ray CT scan  of chest Pleural fluid analysis   Thoracentesis Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection. This involves the following: Placing a tube in your chest to drain the pus Giving you antibiotics to control the infection If you have problems breathing, you may need surgery to help your lung expand properly. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 When empyema complicates pneumonia, the risk of permanent lung damage and death goes up. Long-term treatment with antibiotics and drainage are needed.  In general, most people fully recover from empyema. Possible Complications 
 
 Having empyema may lead to the following: Pleural thickening Reduced lung function When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of empyema. Prevention 
 
 Prompt and effective treatment of lung infections may prevent some cases of empyema. Alternative Names 
 
 Empyema - plural; Pyothorax; Pleurisy - purulent Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Chest tube insertion - series 
 References 
 
 Broaddus VC, Light RW. Pleural effusion. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al., eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 79. McCool FD. Diseases of the diaphragm, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 99. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Thoracentesis 
 
 Review Date 2/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia