
 Endocervical culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endocervical culture is a laboratory test that helps identify infection in the female genital tract. How the Test is Performed 
 
 During a vaginal examination, the health care provider uses a swab to take samples of mucus and cells from the endocervix. This is the area around the opening of the uterus. The samples are sent to a lab. There, they are placed in a special dish (culture). They are then watched to see if bacteria, virus, or fungus grow. Further tests may be done to identify the specific organism and determine the best treatment. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 In the 2 days before the procedure:  Do NOT use creams or other medicines in the vagina.  Do NOT douche. (You should never douche. Douching can cause infection of the vagina or uterus.) Empty your bladder and bowel. At your provider’s office, follow instructions for preparing for the vaginal exam. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel some pressure from the speculum. This is an instrument inserted into the  vagina  to hold the area open so that the provider can view the  cervix  and collect the samples. There may be a slight cramping when the swab touches the cervix. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test may be done to determine the cause of  vaginitis , pelvic pain, an unusual  vaginal discharge , or other signs of infection. Normal Results 
 
 Organisms that are usually present in the vagina are there in the expected amounts. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results indicate the presence of an infection in the genital tract or urinary tract in women, such as: Genital herpes Chronic swelling and irritation of the urethra ( urethritis ) Gonorrhea  or  chlamydia Pelvic inflammatory disaese  (PID) Risks 
 
 There may be slight bleeding or spotting after the test. This is normal. Alternative Names 
 
 Vaginal culture; Female genital tract culture; Culture - cervix Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 Craft AC, Woods GL. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 63. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower and upper genital tracts: vulva, vagina, cervix, toxic shock syndrome, HIV infections, endometritis, and salpingitis. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Read More 
 
 Chlamydia 
 Chlamydia infections in women 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 Strep throat 
 Vaginal dryness 
 Vaginal itching and discharge - adult and adolescent 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Vaginal Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia