
 Endocarditis - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The inner lining of the heart chambers and heart valves is called the endocardium. Endocarditis occurs when this tissue becomes swollen or inflamed. Causes 
 
 Endocarditis occurs when germs enter the bloodstream and then travel to the heart. Bacterial infection is the most common cause Fungal infections are much more rare In some cases, no germs can be found after testing Endocarditis can involve the heart muscle, heart valves, or lining of the heart. Children with endocarditis may have a: Birth defect of the heart Damaged or abnormal heart valve New heart valve after surgery The risk is higher in children who have a history of heart surgery, which can leave rough areas in the lining of the heart chambers. This makes it easier for bacteria to stick to the lining. Germs are most likely to enter the bloodstream: By way of a  central venous access line  that is in place During dental surgery During other surgeries or minor procedures to the airways and lungs, urinary tract, infected skin, or bones and muscles Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of endocarditis may develop slowly or suddenly. Fever, chills, and sweating are frequent symptoms. These sometimes can: Be present for days before any other symptoms appear Come and go, or be more noticeable at nighttime Other symptoms may include: Tiredness Weakness Joint pain Muscle pain Trouble breathing Weight loss Neurological problems, such as seizures and, disturbed mental status Signs of endocarditis can also include: Small bleeding areas under the nails ( splinter hemorrhages ) Red, painless skin spots on the palms and soles (Janeway lesions) Red, painful nodes in the pads of the fingers and toes (Osler nodes) Shortness of breath Swelling of feet, legs, abdomen Exams and Tests 
 
 Your child's health care provider may perform  transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)  to check for endocarditis in children age 10 years or younger. Other tests may include: Blood culture  to help identify the bacteria or fungus that is causing the infection Complete blood count (CBC) C-reactive protein (CRP) or  erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) Treatment 
 
 Treatment for endocarditis depends upon the: Cause of the infection Child's age Severity of the symptoms Your child will need to be in the hospital to receive antibiotics through a vein (IV). Blood cultures and tests will help the provider choose the best antibiotic. Your child will need long-term antibiotic therapy. Your child will need this therapy for 4 to 8 weeks to fully kill all the bacteria from the heart chambers and valves. Antibiotic treatments started in the hospital will need to be continued at home once your child is stable. Surgery to replace an infected heart valve may be needed when: Antibiotics don't work to treat the infection The infection is breaking off in little pieces, resulting in strokes The child develops heart failure as a result of damaged heart valves The heart valve is badly damaged Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Getting treatment for endocarditis right away improves the chances of clearing the infection and preventing complications. Possible Complications 
 
 The possible complications of endocarditis in children are: Damage to the heart and heart valves Abscess in the heart muscle Infective clot in the coronary arteries  Stroke, caused by small clots or pieces of the infection breaking off and traveling to the brain Spread of the infection to other parts of the body, such as the lungs When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
Call your child's health care provider if you notice the following symptoms during or after treatment: Blood in urine Chest pain Fatigue Fever Numbness Weakness Weight loss without a change in diet Prevention 
 
 The American Heart Association recommends preventive antibiotics for children at risk for endocarditis, such as those with: Certain birth defects of the heart Heart transplant and valve problems Man-made (prosthetic) heart valves A past history of endocarditis These children should receive antibiotics when they have: Dental procedures that are likely to cause bleeding Procedures involving the breathing tract, the urinary tract, or the digestive tract Procedures on skin infections and soft tissue infections Alternative Names 
 
 Valve infection - children; Staphylococcus aureus - endocarditis - children; Enterococcus - endocarditis- children; Streptococcus viridians - endocarditis - children; Candida - endocarditis - children; Bacterial endocarditis - children; Infective endocarditis - children; Congenital heart disease - endocarditis - children References 
 
 Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al; American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young and the Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circulation.  2015;132(15):1487-1515. PMID: 26373317  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26373317 .  Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Infective endocarditis. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, eds.  Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 111. Starke JR. Infective endocarditis. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 26. 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endocarditis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia