
 Endoscopic ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endoscopic ultrasound is a type of imaging test. It is used to see organs in and near the digestive tract. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Ultrasound is a way to see the inside of the body using high-frequency sound waves. Endoscopic ultrasound does this with a thin, flexible tube device called an endoscope. This tube is passed either through the mouth or through the rectum and into the digestive tract. Sound waves are sent out the end of the tube and bounce off the organs in the body. A computer receives these waves and uses them to create a picture of what is inside. This test does not expose you to harmful radiation.  If a sample or biopsy is needed, a thin needle can be passed through the tube to collect fluid or tissue. This does not hurt. The test takes 30 to 90 minutes to complete. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will tell you what to do. You will be told when to stop drinking and eating before the test. Give your provider a list of all the medicines you take (prescription and over-the-counter), herbs, and supplements. You will be told when you can take these. Some need to be stopped a week before the test. Ask your provider which medicines you should take on the morning of surgery.  Since you will not be able to drive or return to work on the day of this test, you will need someone to take you home. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Before this test you will get medicine through an IV to help you relax (a sedative). You may fall asleep or not remember the test. Some people feel the test is slightly uncomfortable. For the first hour after this test, you may feel sleepy and unable to drink or walk. You may have a sore throat. Air or carbon dioxide gas may have been put in your digestive tract during the test to move the tube more easily. This may make you feel bloated, but this feeling will go away. When you are fully awake, you can be taken home. Rest that day. You may have fluids and light meals. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may have this test to: Find the cause of  abdominal pain Find the cause of  weight loss Diagnose diseases of the pancreas, bile duct, and gallbladder Guide a biopsy of tumors, lymph nodes, and other tissue Look at cysts, tumors, and cancers Look for stones in the bile duct  This test can also stage cancers of the: Esophagus Stomach Pancreas Rectum Normal Results 
 
 The organs will appear normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The results depend on what is found during the test. If you DO NOT understand the results, or have questions or concerns, talk to your provider. Risks 
 
 Risks for any sedation are: Reactions to medicine Problems breathing  Complications from this test include: Bleeding A tear in the lining of the digestive tract Infection Pancreatitis  References 
 
 Lee LS. Endoscopic ultrasound. In: McNalley PR, ed.  GI/Liver Secrets Plus . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 71. Pasricha PJ. Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 134. 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endoscopy 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia