
 Endocervical gram stain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endocervical Gram stain is a method to identify bacteria on tissue from the cervix using a special series of stains. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test requires a sample of tissue from the lining of the cervical canal (the opening to the uterus). You lie on your back with your feet in stirrups. The health care provider will insert an instrument called a speculum into the vagina. This instrument is used during regular female pelvic exams. It opens the vagina to better view certain pelvic structures. After the  cervix  is cleaned, a dry, sterile swab is inserted through the speculum to the cervical canal and gently turned. It may be left in place for a few seconds to absorb as many germs as possible. The swab is removed and sent to a laboratory, where it will be smeared on a slide. A series of stains called a Gram stain is applied to the sample. A laboratory technician looks at the stained smear under the microscope for the presence of bacteria. The color, size, and shape of the cells help identify the type of bacteria. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 DO NOT douche for 24 hours before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel minor discomfort during specimen collection. This procedure feels very much like a routine  Pap smear . Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to detect and identify abnormal bacteria in the cervix area. If you develop signs of an infection or think that you have a sexually transmitted disease (such as gonorrhea), this test can help confirm the diagnosis. It can also identify the germ that is causing the infection.  This test is rarely done because it has been replaced with more accurate ones. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means no abnormal bacteria are seen in the sample.  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Bacterial vaginosis Chlamydia Gonorrhea Yeast infection The test may also be performed for  gonococcal arthritis , to determine the site of the initial infection. Risks 
 
 There is virtually no risk. Considerations 
 
 If you have gonorrhea or another sexually transmitted disease, it is very important that all of your sexual partners also receive treatment, even if they have no symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Gram stain of cervix References 
 
 Cohen MS. Approach to the patient with a sexually transmitted disease. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 293. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower genital tract: vulva, vagina, cervix, toxic shock syndrome, endometritis, and salpingitis. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Workowski KA, Berman S; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1-110. PMID: 21160459  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21160459 .  Read More 
 
 Gonococcal arthritis 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cervix Disorders 
 Chlamydia Infections 
 Gonorrhea 
 Vaginal Diseases 
 Yeast Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia