
 Enlarged prostate 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The prostate is a gland that produces the fluid that carries sperm during ejaculation. The prostate gland surrounds the urethra, the tube through which urine passes out of the body. An enlarged prostate means the gland has grown bigger. Prostate enlargement happens to almost all men as they get older. An enlarged prostate is often called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). It is not cancer, and it does not raise your risk for prostate cancer. Watch this video about: Enlarged prostate gland Causes 
 
 The actual cause of prostate enlargement is unknown. Factors linked to aging and changes in the cells of the testicles may have a role in the growth of the gland. Men who have had their testicles removed at a young age (for example, as a result of testicular cancer) do not develop BPH. Also, if the testicles are removed after a man develops BPH, the prostate begins to shrink in size. Some facts about prostate enlargement: The likelihood of developing an enlarged prostate increases with age. BPH is so common that it has been said all men will have an enlarged prostate if they live long enough. A small amount of prostate enlargement is present in many men over age 40. More than 90% of men over age 80 have the condition. No risk factors have been identified other than having normally functioning testicles.  Symptoms 
 
 Less than half of all men with BPH have symptoms of the disease. Symptoms may include: Dribbling at the end of urinating Inability to urinate (urinary retention) Incomplete emptying of your bladder Incontinence Needing to urinate 2 or more times per night Pain with urination  or  bloody urine  (these may indicate infection) Slowed or delayed start of the urinary stream Straining to urinate Strong and sudden urge to urinate Weak urine stream  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will ask you questions about your medical history and do a  digital rectal exam  to feel the prostate gland. Other tests you may have include:  Urine flow rate Post-void residual urine test to see how much urine is left in your bladder after you urinate Pressure-flow studies to measure the pressure in the bladder as you urinate Urinalysis  to check for blood or infection Urine culture  to check for infection Prostate-specific antigen ( PSA ) blood test to screen for prostate cancer Cystoscopy You may be asked to fill out a form to rate how bad your symptoms are and how much they affect your daily life. Your doctor can use this score to judge if your condition is getting worse over time. Treatment 
 
 The treatment you choose will be based on how bad your symptoms are and how much they bother you. Your provider will also take into account other medical problems you may have. Treatment options include "watchful waiting," lifestyle changes, medicines, or surgery. If you are over 60, you are more likely to have symptoms. But many men with an enlarged prostate have only minor symptoms. Self-care steps are often enough to make you feel better. If you have BPH, you should have a yearly exam to monitor your symptoms and see if you need changes in treatment.  SELF-CARE For mild symptoms: Urinate when you first get the urge. Also, go to the bathroom on a timed schedule even if you don't feel a need to urinate. Avoid alcohol and caffeine, especially after dinner. DO NOT drink a lot of fluid all at once. Spread out fluids during the day. Avoid drinking fluids within 2 hours of bedtime. Try NOT to take over-the-counter cold and sinus medicines that contain decongestants or antihistamines. These drugs can increase BPH symptoms. Keep warm and exercise regularly. Cold weather and lack of physical activity may worsen symptoms. Learn and perform  Kegel exercises  (pelvic strengthening exercises). Reduce stress. Nervousness and tension can lead to more frequent urination.  MEDICINES Alpha-1 blockers are a class of drugs that are also used to treat high blood pressure. These medicines relax the muscles of the bladder neck and prostate. This allows easier urination. Most people who take alpha-1 blockers notice improvement in their symptoms. Finasteride and dutasteride lower levels of hormones produced by the prostate. These drugs also reduce the size of the gland, increase urine flow rate, and decrease symptoms of BPH. You may need to take these medicines for 3 to 6 months before you notice symptoms getting better. Possible side effects include decreased sex drive and  impotence . Antibiotics may be prescribed to treat chronic prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate), which may occur with BPH. BPH symptoms improve in some men after a course of antibiotics. Watch out for  drugs that may make your symptoms worse : SAW PALMETTO Many herbs have been tried for treating an enlarged prostate. Many men use saw palmetto to ease symptoms. Some studies have shown that it may help with symptoms, but results are mixed and more research is needed. If you use saw palmetto and think it works, ask your doctor if you should still take it. SURGERY Prostate surgery may be recommended if you have: Incontinence Recurrent  blood in the urine Inability to fully empty the bladder (urinary retention) Recurrent  urinary tract infections Decreasing kidney function Bladder stones Bothersome symptoms not responding to medicines  The choice of which surgical procedure is recommended is most often based on the severity of your symptoms and the size and shape of your prostate gland. Most men who have prostate surgery have improvement in urine flow rates and symptoms. Transurethral resection of the prostate  (TURP): This is the most common and most proven surgical treatment for BPH. TURP is performed by inserting a scope through the penis and removing the prostate piece by piece. Simple prostatectomy : It is a procedure to remove the inside part of the prostate gland. It is done through a surgical cut in your lower belly. This treatment is most often done on men who have very large prostate glands.  Other,  less-invasive procedures  use heat to destroy prostate tissue. None have been proven to be better than TURP. People who receive these procedures are more likely to need surgery again after 5 or 10 years. However, these procedures may be a choice for: Younger men (many of the less-invasive procedures carry a lower risk for impotence and incontinence than TURP, although the risk with TURP is not very high) Older people People with severe medical conditions, including uncontrolled  diabetes ,  cirrhosis , alcoholism,  psychosis , and serious lung, kidney, or heart disease Men who are taking blood-thinning drugs  Support Groups 
 
 Some men may find it helpful to take part in a  BPH support groups .  Possible Complications 
 
 Men who have had BPH for long time with slowly worsening symptom may develop: Sudden inability to urinate Urinary tract infections Urinary stones Damage to the kidneys Blood in the urine  BPH may come back over time even after having surgery.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if you have: Less urine than usual Fever or chills Back, side, or abdominal pain Blood or pus in your urine  Also call if: Your bladder does not feel completely empty after you urinate. You take medicines that may cause urinary problems such as diuretics, antihistamines, antidepressants, or sedatives. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your doctor. You have tried self-care steps for 2 months and symptoms have not improved.  Alternative Names 
 
 BPH; Benign prostatic hyperplasia (hypertrophy); Prostate - enlarged Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 BPH 
 Prostatectomy  - Series 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) - Series 
 References 
 
 McNicholas TA, Kirby RS, Lepor H. Evaluation and nonsurgical management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 91. McVary KT, Roehrborn CG, Avins AL, et al. Update on AUA guideline on the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  J Urol . 2011;185(5):1793-1803. PMID: 21420124  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21420124 . Oelke M, Bachmann A, Descazeaud A, et al. EAU guidelines on the treatment and follow-up of non-neurogenic male lower urinary tract symptoms including benign prostatic obstruction.  Eur Urol . 2013;64(1):118-40. PMID: 23541338  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23541338 . Roehrborn CG. Male lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).  Med Clin North Am . 2011;95(1):87-100. PMID: 21095413  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21095413 . Read More 
 
 Prostate resection - minimally invasive 
 Simple prostatectomy 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Enlarged prostate - what to ask your doctor  
 Prostate resection - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate - discharge  
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Enlarged Prostate (BPH) 
 Browse the Encyclopedia