
 Enlarged adenoids 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The adenoids are lymph tissues that sit in your upper airway between your nose and the back of your throat. They are similar to the tonsils. Enlarged adenoids means this tissue is swollen. Causes 
 
 Enlarged adenoids may be normal. They may grow bigger when the baby grows in the womb. The adenoids help the body prevent or fight infections by trapping bacteria and germs. Infections can cause the adenoids to become swollen. The adenoids may stay enlarged even when you are not sick. Symptoms 
 
 Children with enlarged adenoids often breathe through the mouth because the nose is blocked. Mouth breathing occurs mostly at night, but may be present during the day.  Mouth breathing may lead to the following symptoms:  Bad breath Cracked lips Dry mouth Persistent  runny nose  or  nasal congestion Enlarged adenoids may also cause sleep problems. A child may: Be restless while sleeping Snore a lot Have episodes of not breathing during sleep ( sleep apnea )  Children with enlarged adenoids may also have more frequent ear infections. Exams and Tests 
 
 The adenoids cannot be seen by looking in the mouth directly. The health care provider can see them by using a special mirror in the mouth or by inserting a flexible tube (called an endoscope) placed through the nose. Tests may include: X-ray  of the throat or neck Sleep study if sleep apnea is suspected Treatment 
 
 Many people with enlarged adenoids have few or no symptoms and do not need treatment. Adenoids shrink as a child grows older. The provider may prescribe antibiotics or nasal steroid sprays if an infection develops. Surgery to remove the adenoids ( adenoidectomy ) may be done if the symptoms are severe or persistent. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child has trouble breathing through the nose or other symptoms of enlarged adenoids. Alternative Names 
 
 Adenoids - enlarged Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Adenoids 
 References 
 
 Wetmore RF. Tonsils and adenoids. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 383. Read More 
 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Tonsil and adenoid removal - discharge 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adenoids 
 Browse the Encyclopedia