
 Enteroscopy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Enteroscopy is a procedure used to examine the small intestine (small bowel). How the Test is Performed 
 
 A thin, flexible tube ( endoscope ) is inserted through the mouth and into the upper gastrointestinal tract. During a double-balloon enteroscopy, balloons attached to the endoscope can be inflated to allow the doctor to view a section of the small intestine. In a  colonoscopy , a flexible tube is inserted through your rectum and colon. The tube can most often reach into the end part of the small intestine (ileum).  Tissue samples removed during enteroscopy are sent to the lab for examination. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not take products containing aspirin for 1 week before the procedure. Tell your health care provider if you take blood thinners such as warfarin (Coumadin) or clopidogrel (Plavix), because these may interfere with the test. Do NOT stop taking any medicine unless told to do so by your provider. Do not eat any solid foods or milk products after midnight the day of your procedure. You may have clear liquids until 4 hours before your exam. You must sign a consent form. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will be given calming medicine for the procedure and will not feel any discomfort. You may have some bloating or cramping when you wake up. This is from air that is pumped into the abdomen to expand the area during the procedure.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is most often performed to help diagnose diseases of the small intestines. It may be done if you have: Abnormal x-ray results Tumors in the small intestines Unexplained diarrhea Unexplained gastrointestinal bleeding Normal Results 
 
 In a normal test result, the provider will not find sources of bleeding in the small bowel, and will not find any tumors or other abnormal tissue. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Signs may include: Abnormalities of the tissue lining the small intestine (mucosa) or the tiny, finger-like projections on the surface of the small intestine (villi) Abnormal lengthening of blood vessels (angiectasis) in the intestinal lining Immune cells called PAS-positive macrophages Polyps  or cancer Radiation enteritis Swollen or enlarged  lymph nodes  or lymphatic vessels Ulcers  Changes found on enteroscopy may be signs of disorders and conditions, including: Amyloidosis Celiac sprue Crohn disease Folate  or  vitamin B12  deficiency Giardiasis Infectious  gastroenteritis Lymphangiectasia Lymphoma Small intestinal angiectasia Tropical sprue Whipple disease Risks 
 
 Complications are rare but may include: Excessive bleeding from the biopsy site Hole in the bowel (bowel perforation) Infection of the biopsy site leading to  bacteremia Vomiting, followed by  aspiration  into the lungs Considerations 
 
 Factors that prohibit use of this test may include: 
   Uncooperative or confused person
    
   Untreated blood clotting (coagulation) disorders
    
   Use of aspirin or other medicines that prevent the blood from clotting normally (anticoagulants)
    The greatest risk is bleeding. Signs include: Abdominal pain Blood in the stools Vomiting blood Alternative Names 
 
 Small bowel biopsy; Push enteroscopy; Double-balloon enteroscopy; Capsule enteroscopy; Sonde enteroscopy Images 
 
 
 Small intestine biopsy 
 References 
 
 Kovacs TO, Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 135. Sidhu R, Sanders DS, Morris AJ, McAlindon ME. Guidelines on small bowel enteroscopy and capsule endoscopy in adults.  Gut . 2008;57:125-136. PMID: 18094205  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18094205 . Vargo JJ. Complications of gastrointestinal endoscopy. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Crohn disease 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Giardia infection 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Lactose intolerance 
 Lymphadenitis 
 Radiation enteritis 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 Tropical sprue 
 Valley fever 
 Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) 
 Vitamin B12 
 Whipple disease 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diarrhea 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Intestinal Cancer 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia