
 Enteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Enteritis is inflammation of the small intestine. Causes 
 
 Enteritis is most often caused by eating or drinking things that are contaminated with bacteria or viruses. The germs settle in the small intestine and cause inflammation and swelling. Enteritis may also be caused by: An autoimmune condition, such as  Crohn disease Certain drugs, including ibuprofen, naproxen sodium, and cocaine Damage from radiation therapy Celiac disease  The inflammation can also involve the stomach ( gastritis ) and large intestine ( colitis ). Risk factors include: Recent stomach flu among household members Recent travel Exposure to unclean water Types of enteritis include: Bacterial gastroenteritis Campylobacter enteritis E coli  enteritis Food poisoning Radiation enteritis Salmonella enteritis Shigella enteritis Staph aureus food poisoning  Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms may begin hours to days after you become infected. Symptoms may include: 
   Abdominal pain
    
   Diarrhea - acute and severe
    Loss of appetite Vomiting  Blood in the stool Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: A  stool culture  to look for the type of infection. However, this test may not always identify the bacteria causing the illness. A colonoscopy and/or upper endoscopy to look at the small intestine and to take tissue samples if needed. Imaging tests such as CT scan and MRI. Treatment 
 
 Mild cases often do not need treatment. Antidiarrheal medicine is sometimes used. However, it may not be recommended in some cases because it can slow the germ from leaving the digestive tract. You may need rehydration with  electrolyte  solutions if your body does not have enough fluids. You may need medical care and fluids through a vein ( intravenous  fluids) if you have diarrhea and cannot keep fluids down. This is often the case with young children. If you take diuretics (water pills) and develop diarrhea, you may need to stop taking the diuretics. However, do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your health care provider. You may need to take antibiotics. People who have Crohn disease will often need to take anti-inflammatory medicines. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms most often go away without treatment in a few days in otherwise healthy people. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Dehydration Long-term diarrhea  Note: In babies, the diarrhea can cause severe dehydration that comes on very quickly.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You become dehydrated. Diarrhea does not go away in 3 to 4 days. You have a fever over 101°F (38.3°C). You have blood in your stool. Prevention 
 
 The following steps may help prevent enteritis: Always wash your hands after using the toilet and before eating or preparing food or drinks. You may also clean your hands with a 60% alcohol-based product. Boil water that comes from unknown sources, such as streams and outdoor wells, before drinking it. Use only clean utensils for eating or handling foods, especially when handling eggs and poultry. Cook food thoroughly. Use coolers to store food that needs to stay chilled.  Images 
 
 
 Salmonella typhi organism 
 Yersinia enterocolitica organism 
 Campylobacter jejuni organism 
 Clostridium difficile organism 
 Digestive system 
 Esophagus and stomach anatomy 
 References 
 
 DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Lima AAM, Warren CA, Guerrant  RL. Bacterial inflammatory enteritides. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 101. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Campylobacter infection 
 Colitis 
 Crohn disease 
 Dehydration 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Fever 
 Food poisoning 
 Gastritis 
 Radiation enteritis 
 Salmonella enterocolitis 
 Shigellosis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia