
 Eosinophilic fasciitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Eosinophilic fasciitis is a syndrome in which muscle tissue under the skin, called fascia, becomes swollen, inflamed and thick. The hands, arms, legs, and feet can swell quickly. The condition is very rare. The disease may look similar to  scleroderma  but is not related. Causes 
 
 The cause of eosinophilic fasciitis is unknown. In people with this condition, white blood cells called eosinophils, build up in the muscles and tissues. Eosinophils are linked to allergic reactions. The syndrome is more common in people ages 30 to 60. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Bone pain or tenderness Carpal tunnel syndrome Muscle weakness Tenderness and swelling of the skin on the arms, legs, or sometimes the joints (most often on both sides of the body) Thickened skin that looks puckered  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: CBC with differential Gamma globulins (a type of immune system protein) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) MRI Muscle biopsy Skin biopsy Treatment 
 
 Corticosteroids and other immune-suppressing medicines are used to relieve symptoms. These medicines are more effective when started early in the disease. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may also help reduce symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, the condition goes away within 3 to 5 years. However, symptoms may last longer or come back.  Possible Complications 
 
 Arthritis is a rare complication of eosinophilic fasciitis. Some people may develop very serious blood disorders or blood-related cancers, such as aplastic anemia or  leukemia . The outlook is much worse if blood diseases occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Lee LA, Werth VP. The Skin and Rhematic Diseases. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Eosinophil count - absolute 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, professor of medicine, division of rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eosinophilic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia