
 Epicanthal folds 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An epicanthal fold is skin of the upper eyelid that covers the inner corner of the eye. The fold runs from nose to the inner side of the eyebrow. Causes 
 
 Epicanthal folds may be normal for people of Asiatic descent and some non-Asian infants. Epicanthal folds also may be seen in young children of any race before the bridge of the nose begins to rise. However, the may also be due to certain medical conditions, including: Down syndrome Fetal alcohol syndrome Turner syndrome Phenylketonuria  (PKU) Williams syndrome Noonan syndrome Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Blepharophimosis syndrome  Home Care 
 
 In most cases, no home care needed. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This trait is most often found before or during the first well-baby exam. Call your health care provider if you notice epicanthal folds on your child's eyes and the reason for their presence is unknown. What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The provider will examine the child and ask questions about the medical history and symptoms. Questions may include: Do any family members have Down syndrome or other genetic disorder? Is there a family history of  intellectual disability  or birth defects?  A child who is not Asian and is born with epicanthal folds may be examined for additional signs of Down syndrome or other genetic disorders. Alternative Names 
 
 Plica palpebronasalis Images 
 
 
 The face 
 Epicanthal fold 
 Epicanthal folds 
 References 
 
 Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stass-Isern M. Abnormalities of the lids. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 616. 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia