
 Epiglottitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Epiglottitis is inflammation of the epiglottis. This is the tissue that covers the trachea (windpipe). Epiglottitis is a life-threatening disease. Causes 
 
 The epiglottis is a stiff, yet flexible tissue (called cartilage) at the back of the tongue. It closes your windpipe (trachea) when you swallow so food does not enter your airway. This helps prevent coughing or choking after swallowing. In children, epiglottitis is usually caused by the bacteria  Haemophilus influenzae  ( H. influenzae ) type B. In adults, it is often due to other bacteria such as  Strepcoccus pneumoniae , or viruses such as herpes simplex virus and varicella-zoster. Epiglottitis is now very uncommon because the  
 H. influenzae type B (Hib) vaccine  is given routinely to all children. The disease was once most often seen in children ages 2 through 6. In rare cases, epiglottitis can occur in adults. Symptoms 
 
 Epiglottitis begins with a high fever and sore throat. Other symptoms may include: Abnormal breathing sounds ( stridor ) Fever Blue skin color ( cyanosis ) Drooling Difficulty breathing (the person may need to sit upright and lean slightly forward to breathe) Difficulty swallowing Voice changes (hoarseness)  The airways can become totally blocked, which can result in cardiac arrest and death. Exams and Tests 
 
 Epiglottitis is a medical emergency. Seek medical help right away. Do not use anything to press the tongue down to try to look at the throat at home. Doing so may make the condition worse. The health care provider may examine the voice box (larynx) using a small mirror held against the back of the throat. Or a viewing tube called a laryngoscope may be used. This examination is best done in the operating room or a similar setting where sudden breathing problems can be more easily handled.  Tests that may be done include: Blood culture  or  throat culture Complete blood count (CBC) Neck x-ray  Treatment 
 
 A hospital stay is needed, usually in the intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment involves methods to help the person breathe, including: Breathing tube ( intubation) Moistened (humidified) oxygen Other treatments may include: Antibiotics to treat the infection Anti-inflammatory medicines, called corticosteroids, to decrease throat swelling Fluids given through a vein (by IV) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Epiglottitis can be a life-threatening emergency. With proper treatment, the outcome is usually good. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Spasm may cause the airways to close suddenly. Or, the airways may become totally blocked. Either of these situations could result in death. Prevention 
 
 The Hib vaccine protects most children from epiglottitis. The most common bacteria ( H. influenza  type b )  that causes epiglottitis is easily spread. If someone in your family is sick from this bacteria, other family members need to be tested and treated. Alternative Names 
 
 Supraglottitis Images 
 
 
 Haemophilus influenza organism 
 Throat anatomy 
 Haemophilus influenza organism 
 References 
 
 Nayak JL, Weinberg GA. Epiglottitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 64. Roosevelt GE. Acute inflammatory upper airway obstruction (croup, epiglottitis, laryngitis, and bacterial tracheitis). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 385. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Croup 
 Fever 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Haemophilus Infections 
 Throat Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia