
 Episcleritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Episcleritis is irritation and inflammation of the episclera, a thin layer of tissue covering the white part (sclera) of the eye. It is not an infection. Causes 
 
 Episcleritis is a common condition. In most cases the problem is mild and vision is normal.  The cause is often unknown. But, it may occur with certain diseases, such as: Herpes zoster Rheumatoid arthritis Sjogren syndrome Syphilis Tuberculosis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: A pink or purple color to the normally white part of the eye Eye pain Eye tenderness Sensitivity to light Tearing of the eye Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do an eye exam to diagnose the disorder. Most of the time, no special tests are needed. Treatment 
 
 The condition most often goes away on its own in 1 to 2 weeks. Using corticosteroid eye drops may help ease the symptoms faster. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Episcleritis most often improves without treatment. However, treatment may make symptoms go away sooner. Possible Complications 
 
 In some cases, the condition may return. Rarely, irritation and inflammation of the white part of the eye may develop. This is called scleritis. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of episcleritis that last for more than 2 weeks. Get checked again if your pain gets worse or you have problems with your vision. Images 
 
 
 External and internal eye anatomy 
 References 
 
 Goldstein DA, Patel SS, Tessler HH. Episcleritis and scleritis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2014:chap 4.11. Watson P. Diseases of the sclera and episclera. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology.  2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4;chap 23. Yanoff M, Cameron JD. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Conjunctiva 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sclera 
 Scleritis 
 Shingles 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia