
 Erysipeloid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Erysipeloid is a rare infection of the skin caused by bacteria. Causes 
 
 The bacteria that cause erysipeloid are called  Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae . This type of bacteria may be found in fish, birds, mammals, and shellfish. Erysipeloid usually affects people who work with these animals (such as farmers, butchers, or veterinarians). Infection results when the bacteria enter the skin through small breaks. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may develop in 2 to 7 days after bacteria enter the skin. Usually, the fingers and hands are affected. But any exposed area of the body can get infected if there is a break in the skin. Symptoms may include: Bright red skin in the infected area Swelling of the area Throbbing pain with itching or burning sensation Fluid-filled blisters Low fever if the infection spreads  Swollen lymph nodes (sometimes) The infection may spread to other fingers. It usually doesn't spread past the wrist. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. The provider can often make the diagnosis by looking at the infected skin and by asking how your symptoms started. Tests that may be done to confirm the diagnosis include: Skin biopsy  and  culture  to check for the bacteria Blood tests to check for bacteria if the infection has spread Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics, especially penicillin, are very effective to treat this condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Erysipeloid may get better on its own. It rarely spreads. If it does spread, the lining of the heart can become infected. This condition is called  endocarditis .  Alternative Names 
 
 Erysipelothricosis - erysipeloid; Skin infection - erysipeloid; Cellulitis - erysipeloid; Erysipeloid of Rosenbach References 
 
 Habif TP. Bacterial infections. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 9. Reboli AC. Erysipelothrix infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 295. Read More 
 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 Erysipelas 
 Fever 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Rashes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia