
 Erythema nodosum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Erythema nodosum is an inflammatory disorder. It involves tender, red bumps ( nodules ) under the skin. Causes 
 
 In about half of cases, the exact cause of erythema nodosum is unknown.  Some cases may occur with infections. Some of the more common infections are: Streptococcus (most common) Cat scratch disease Chlamydia Coccidioidomycosis Hepatitis B Histoplasmosis Leptospirosis Mononucleosis  (EBV) Mycobacteria Mycoplasma Psittacosis Syphilis Tuberculosis Tularemia Yersinia Erythema nodosum may occur with sensitivity to certain medicines, including: Antibiotics, including amoxicillin and other penicillins Sulfonamides Sulfones Birth control pills Progestin Sometimes, erythema nodosum may occur during pregnancy.  Other disorders linked to this condition include leukemia, lymphoma, sarcoidosis,  rheumatic fever , Bechet disease, and  ulcerative colitis . The condition is more common in women than it is in men. Symptoms 
 
 Erythema nodosum is most common on the shins. It may also occur on other areas of the body such as buttocks, calves, ankles, thighs, and arms. The lesions begin as flat, firm, hot, red, painful lumps that are about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) across. Within a few days, they may become purplish in color. Over several weeks, the lumps fade to a brownish, flat patch. Other symptoms may include: Fever  General ill feeling (malaise) Joint aches Skin redness, inflammation, or irritation Swelling of the leg or other affected area Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor can diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Tests that may be done include:  Punch biopsy  of a nodule Throat culture to rule out a strep infection Chest x-ray to rule out sarcoidosis or tuberculosis Treatment 
 
 The underlying infection, drug, or disease should be identified and treated. Treatment may include:  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to reduce pain and swelling. Stronger anti-inflammatory medicines called steroids, taken by mouth or given as a shot.  Potassium iodide (SSKI) solution to clear up the nodules. Salicylate medicines to reduce  acute  inflammation.  Pain medicines (analgesics). Rest. Raising the sore area (elevation). Hot or cold compresses to help reduce discomfort. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Erythema nodosum is uncomfortable, but not dangerous in most cases. Symptoms most often go away within about 6 weeks, but may return. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of erythema nodosum. Images 
 
 
 Erythema nodosum associated with sarcoidosis 
 Erythema nodosum on the foot 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Erythema nodosum. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:486-486. Schwartz RA, Nervi SJ. Erythema nodosum: a sign of systemic disease.  Am Fam Physician . 2007;75(5):695-700. PMID: 17375516  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17375516 .  Read More 
 
 Fever 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Leptospirosis 
 Malaise 
 Mononucleosis 
 Patches 
 Psittacosis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Rheumatic fever 
 Skin nodules 
 Tularemia 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 Valley fever 
 
 Review Date 7/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia