
 Erythema multiforme 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Erythema multiforme (EM) is a skin reaction that comes from an infection or another trigger. Causes 
 
 EM is a type of  allergic reaction . In most cases, it occurs in response to an infection. In rare cases, it is caused by certain medicines or body-wide (systemic) illness. Infections that may lead to EM include: Viruses, such as  herpes simplex  that cause cold sores and genital herpes (most common) Bacteria, such as  Mycoplasma pneumoniae  that cause lung infection  Funguses, such as  Histoplasma capsulatum , that cause  histoplasmosis Medicines that may cause EM include: NSAIDs Allopurinol (treats gout) Certain antibiotics, such as sulfonamides and aminopenicillins Anti-seizure drugs  Systemic illnesses that are associated with EM include: Inflammatory bowel disease, such as  Crohn disease Systemic lupus erythematosus EM occurs mostly in adults 20 to 40 years old. People with EM often have family members who have had EM as well. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of EM include: Fever General ill feeling Itchy  skin Joint aches Many  skin lesions  (sores or abnormal areas)  Skin sores may: Start quickly Come back Spread Be raised or discolored Look like hives Have a central sore surrounded by pale red rings, also called a target, iris, or bulls-eye Have liquid-filled bumps or blisters of various sizes Be located on the upper body, legs, arms, palms, hands, or feet Include the face or lips Appear evenly on both sides of the body (symmetrical) Other symptoms may include: Bloodshot eyes Dry eyes Eye burning, itching, and discharge Eye pain Mouth sores Vision problems There are 2 forms of EM: EM minor usually involves the skin and sometimes mouth sores. EM major often starts with a fever and joint aches. Besides the skin sores and mouth sores, there may be sores in the eyes, genitals, lung airways, or gut. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at your skin to diagnose EM. You'll be asked about your medical history, such as recent infections or medicines you've taken. Tests may include: Skin lesion biopsy Examination of skin tissue under a microscope Treatment 
 
 EM usually goes away on its own with or without treatment.  Your provider will have you stop taking any medicines that may be causing the problem. But, don't stop taking medicines on your own without talking to your provider first. Treatment symptoms may include: Medicines, such as antihistamines, to control itching Moist compresses applied to the skin Pain medicines to reduce fever and discomfort Mouthwashes to ease discomfort of mouth sores that interferes with eating and drinking  Antibiotics for skin infections Corticosteroids to control inflammation Medicines for eye symptoms Good hygiene and staying away from other people may help prevent  secondary infections  (infections that occur from treating the first infection). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Mild forms of EM usually get better in 2 to 6 weeks, but the problem may return. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of EM may include: Patchy skin color Return of EM, especially with HSV infection When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if you have symptoms of EM. Alternative Names 
 
 EM; Erythema multiforme minor; Erythema multiforme major; Erythema multiforme minor - erythema multiforme von Hebra; Acute bullous disorder - erythema multiforme; Herpes simplex - erythema multiforme Images 
 
 
 Erythema multiforme on the hands 
 Erythema multiforme, circular lesions - hands 
 Erythema multiforme, target lesions on the palm 
 Erythema multiforme on the leg 
 Erythema multiforme on the hand 
 Exfoliation following erythroderma 
 References 
 
 French LE, Prins C. Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 20. Revuz J. Erythema multiforme. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 72. Sokumbi O, Wetter DA. Clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of erythema multiforme: a review for the practicing dermatologist.  Int J Dermatol . 2012;51(8):889-902. PMID: 22788803  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22788803 . Read More 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Bullae 
 Cellulitis 
 Myocarditis 
 Rashes 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Drug Reactions 
 Herpes Simplex 
 Skin Conditions 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia