
 Esophageal perforation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An esophageal perforation is a hole in the esophagus. The esophagus is the tube food passes through as it goes from the mouth to the stomach. Causes 
 
 The contents of the esophagus can pass into the area surrounding area in the chest (mediastinum), when there is a hole in the esophagus. This often results in infection of the mediastinum ( mediastinitis ). The most common cause of an esophageal perforation is injury during a medical procedure. However, the use of flexible instruments has made this problem rare. The esophagus may also become perforated as the result of: A tumor Gastric reflux  with  ulceration Previous surgery on the esophagus Swallowing a foreign object or caustic chemicals, such as household cleaners, disk batteries, and battery acid Trauma or injury to the chest and esophagus Violent vomiting  Less common causes include injuries to the esophagus area (blunt trauma) and injury to the esophagus during surgery another organ near the esophagus. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is pain when the problem first occurs. A perforation in the middle or lower most part of the esophagus may cause: Swallowing problems Chest pain Breathing problems Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look for: Fast breathing Fever Low blood pressure Rapid heart rate Neck pain or stiffness and air bubbles underneath the skin if the perforation is in the top part of the esophagus. You may have a  chest x-ray  to look for: Air in the soft tissues of the chest,  Fluid that has leaked from the esophagus into the space around the lungs Collapsed lung. X-rays taken after you drink a non-harmful dye can help pinpoint the location of the perforation. You may also have  chest CT scan  look for an  abscess  in the chest or esophageal cancer.  Treatment 
 
 You may need surgery. Surgery will depend on the location and size of the perforation. If surgery is needed, it is best done within 24 hours.  Treatment may include: Fluids given through a vein (IV) IV antibiotics to prevent or treat infection Draining of fluid around the lungs with a chest tube Mediastinoscopy  to remove fluid that has collected in the area behind the breastbone and between the lungs (mediastinum) A stent may be placed in the esophagus if only a small amount of fluid has leaked. This may help avoid surgery. A perforation in the uppermost (neck region) part of the esophagus may heal by itself if you do not eat or drink for a period of time. In this case, you will need a stomach feeding tube or another way to get nutrients. Surgery is often needed to repair a perforation in the middle or bottom portions of the esophagus. The leak may be treated by simple repair or by removing the esophagus depending on the extent of the problem. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The condition can progress to  shock , even death, if untreated. Outlook is good if the problem is found within 24 hours of it occurring. Most people survive when surgery is done within 24 hours. Survival rate goes down if you wait longer.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Permanent damage to the esophagus (narrowing or stricture) Abscess formation in and around the esophagus Infection in and around the lungs  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Tell your health care provider right away if you develop the problem when you are already in the hospital. Go to the emergency room or call 911 if: You have recently had surgery or a tube placed in the esophagus and you have pain, problems swallowing or breathing You have another reason to suspect that you may have esophageal perforation.  Prevention 
 
 These injuries are hard to prevent. Alternative Names 
 
 Perforation of the esophagus Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Eckstein M, Henderson SO. Thoracic trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Mediastinitis 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia