
 Esophageal spasm 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Esophageal spasms are abnormal contractions of the muscles in the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. These  spasms  do not move food effectively to the stomach. Causes 
 
 The cause of esophageal spasm is unknown. Very hot or very cold foods may trigger spasms in some people. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Problems swallowing  or pain with swallowing Pain in the chest  or upper abdomen  It can be hard to tell a spasm from  angina  pectoris, a symptom of heart disease. The pain may spread to the neck, jaw, arms, or back Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests you may need to look for the condition include: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) Esophageal manometry Esophagogram (barium swallow x-ray)  Treatment 
 
 Nitroglycerin given under the tongue (sublingual) may help a sudden episode of esophageal spasm. Long-acting nitroglycerin and calcium channel blockers are also used for the problem. Long-term (chronic) cases are sometimes treated with low-dose antidepressants such as trazodone or nortriptyline to reduce symptoms. Rarely, severe cases may need dilation (widening) of the esophagus or surgery to control symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 An esophageal spasm may come and go (intermittent) or last for a long time ( chronic) . Medicine can help relieve symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 The condition may not respond to treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of esophageal spasm that don't go away. The symptoms may actually be due to heart problems. Your provider can help decide if you need heart tests. Prevention 
 
 Avoid very hot or very cold foods if you get esophageal spasms. Alternative Names 
 
 Diffuse esophageal spasm; Spasm of the esophagus; Distal esophageal spasm Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Throat anatomy 
 Esophagus 
 References 
 
 Falk GW, Katzka DA. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 138. Pandolfino JE, Kahrilas PJ. Esophageal neuromuscular function and motility disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Muscle cramps 
 
 Review Date 12/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia