
 Esophageal pH monitoring 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Esophageal pH monitoring is a test that measures how often stomach acid enters the tube that leads from the mouth to the stomach (called the esophagus). The test also measures how long the acid stays there. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A thin tube is passed through your nose or mouth to your stomach. The tube is then is pulled back into your esophagus. A monitor attached to the tube measures the acid level in your esophagus. You will wear the monitor on a strap and record your symptoms and activity over the next 24 hours in a diary. You will return to the hospital the next day and the tube will be removed. The information from the monitor will be compared with your diary notes. Infants and children may need to stay in the hospital for the esophageal pH monitoring. This test can also be done during upper GI endoscopy by clipping a pH monitor to the lining of the esophagus.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will ask you to not eat or drink after midnight before the test. You should also avoid smoking. Some medicines may change the test results. Your provider may ask you to not take these for between 24 hours and 2 weeks (or more) before the test. You also may be told to avoid alcohol. Medicines that you may need to stop include: Adrenergic blockers Antacids Anticholinergics Cholinergics Corticosteroids H2 blockers Proton pump inhibitors  DO NOT stop taking any medicine unless told to do so by your provider. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You briefly feel like gagging as the tube is passed through your throat. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Esophageal pH monitoring is used to check how much stomach acid is entering the esophagus. It also checks how well the acid is cleared downward into the stomach. It is a test for gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ). In infants, this test is also used to check for GERD and other problems related to  excessive crying .  Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges may vary depending on the lab doing the test. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased acid in the esophagus may be related to:  Barrett's esophagus Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) Esophageal scarring Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) Heartburn Reflux esophagitis  You may need to have the following tests if your doctor suspects  esophagitis :  Barium swallow Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (also called upper GI endoscopy)  Risks 
 
 Rarely, the following may occur: Arrhythmias  during insertion of the tube Breathing in of vomit if the catheter causes  vomiting Alternative Names 
 
 pH monitoring - esophageal; Esophageal acidity test Images 
 
 
 Esophageal pH monitoring 
 References 
 
 Katzka DA, Falk G. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 140. Richter JE, Friedenberg FK. Gastroesophageal reflux disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Crying - excessive (0 to 6 months) 
 EGD - esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
 Esophagitis 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 Heartburn 
 Upper GI and small bowel series 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 GERD 
 Browse the Encyclopedia