
 ESR 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 ESR stands for erythrocyte sedimentation rate. It is commonly called a "sed rate." It is a test that indirectly measures how much inflammation is in the body. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand. The blood sample is sent to a lab. The test measures how fast red blood cells (called erythrocytes) fall to the bottom of a tall, thin tube. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There are no special steps needed to prepare for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Reasons why a "sed rate" may be done include: Unexplained fevers Certain types of arthritis Muscle symptoms Other vague symptoms that cannot be explained This test may also be used to monitor whether an illness is responding to treatment.  This test can be used to monitor inflammatory diseases or cancer. It is not used to diagnose a specific disorder. However, the test is useful for detecting and monitoring: Autoimmune disorders Bone infections Certain forms of arthritis Inflammatory diseases that cause vague symptoms Tissue death Normal Results 
 
 For adults (Westergren method): Men under 50 years old: less than 15 mm/hr Men over 50 years old: less than 20 mm/hr Women under 50 years old: less than 20 mm/hr Women over 50 years old: less than 30 mm/hr  For children (Westergren method): Newborn: 0 to 2 mm/hr Newborn to puberty: 3 to 13 mm/hr  Note: mm/hr = millimeters per hour Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal ESR may help with a diagnosis, but it does not prove that you have a certain condition. Other tests are almost always needed. An increased ESR rate may be due to: Anemia Cancers such as lymphoma or  multiple myeloma Kidney disease Pregnancy Thyroid disease  The immune system helps protect the body against harmful substances. An  autoimmune disorder  is when the immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys healthy body tissue. ESR is often higher than normal in people with an autoimmune disorder. Common autoimmune disorders include: Lupus Rheumatoid arthritis in adults  or  children Very high ESR levels occur with less common autoimmune disorders, including: Allergic vasculitis Giant cell arteritis Hyperfibrinogenemia (increased  fibrinogen  levels in the blood) Macroglobulinemia - primary Necrotizing vasculitis Polymyalgia rheumatica An increased ESR rate may be due to some infections, including: Body-wide (systemic) infection Bone infections Infection of the heart or heart valves Rheumatic fever Severe skin infections, such as  erysipelas Tuberculosis Lower-than-normal levels occur with: Congestive heart failure Hyperviscosity Hypofibrinogenemia  (decreased fibrinogen levels) Leukemia Low plasma protein (due to liver or kidney disease) Polycythemia Sickle cell anemia Alternative Names 
 
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; Sed rate; Sedimentation rate References 
 
 Pisetsky DS. Laboratory testing in the rheumatic diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 257. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Congenital afibrinogenemia 
 Endometritis 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Necrosis 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Polycythemia - newborn 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Polymyalgia rheumatica 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Temporal arteritis 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Crohn's Disease 
 Giant Cell Arteritis 
 Lupus 
 Polymyalgia Rheumatica 
 Ulcerative Colitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia