
 Estrogen overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Estrogen is a female hormone. Estrogen overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of a product containing the hormone. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Estrogen Where Found 
 
 Estrogen is an ingredient in birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy products. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of an estrogen overdose include: Breast tenderness Drowsiness Excessive  vaginal bleeding  (2 to 7 days after overdose) Fluid retention Headache Emotional changes Nausea and vomiting Skin rash Discolored urine Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) When it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. If an emergency room visit is necessary, the provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. Treatment may include: Activated charcoal (in extreme cases) Blood and urine tests Medicines to treat symptoms Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Serious symptoms are very unlikely. References 
 
 Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 147. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hormone Replacement Therapy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia