
 Euglobulin lysis time 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Euglobulin lysis time (ELT) is a blood test that measures how fast clots break down in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Follow the instructions that tell you how long before the test you need to stop exercising. Heavy exercise can cause a shorter-than-normal ELT time. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This is one of the best tests to tell the difference between  primary fibrinolysis  and  disseminated intravascular coagulation  (DIC). Primary fibrinolysis is the normal breakdown of blood clots. DIC is disease that prevents blood from clotting normally. The test can also be used to monitor patients who are taking streptokinase or urokinase after a heart attack. These are medicines that prevent blood clots. Normal Results 
 
 A normal value will range from 90 minutes to 6 hours. Euglobulin clot lysis is normally complete within 2 to 4 hours. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A longer-than-normal ELT time may be due to: Diabetes Prematurity  (baby being born too early)  A shorter-than-normal ELT time may be due to: Blood vessel injury or surgery Cancer of the prostate Liver  cirrhosis Fibrinogen  deficiency Leukemia Pregnancy complications (for example, antepartum hemorrhage,  hydatidiform mole , amniotic  embolism ) Shock A bleeding disorder called thrombocytopenia purpura  The test may also be done to diagnose or rule out: Spontaneous abortion A bone marrow disorder called  primary thrombocythemia Risks 
 
 There is a very little risk from having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size so it may be harder to take a blood sample from one person than another. Other slight risks from having blood drawn may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Euglobulin clot lysis; Fibrinolysis/euglobulin lysis; ELT References 
 
 Fink LM, Marlar RA, Miller JL. Antithrombotic therapy. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.  22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 42. Schmaier AH, Miller JL. Coagulation and fibrinolysis. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.  22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Cirrhosis 
 Diabetes 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Fibrinolysis - primary or secondary 
 Heart attack 
 Hydatidiform mole 
 Miscarriage 
 Premature infant 
 Prostate cancer 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Blood Clots 
 Browse the Encyclopedia