
 Extremity angiography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Extremity angiography is a test used to see the arteries in the hands, arms, feet, or legs. It is also called peripheral angiography.  Angiography uses x-rays and a special dye to see inside the arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done in a hospital. You will lie on an x-ray table. You may ask for some medicine to make you sleep and relax (sedative) if you are anxious about the test. The health care provider will shave and clean an area, most often in the groin. A numbing medicine (anesthetic) is injected into the skin over an artery. A needle is placed into that artery. A thin plastic tube called a catheter is passed through the needle into the artery. The doctor moves it into the area of the body being studied. The doctor can see live images of the area on a TV-like monitor, and uses them as a guide. Dye flows through the catheter and into the arteries. X-ray images are taken of the arteries.  Certain treatments can be done during this procedure. These treatments include: Dissolving a blood clot with medicine Opening a partially blocked artery with a balloon Placing a small tube called a stent into an artery to help hold it open  The health care team will check your  pulse  (heart rate), blood pressure, and breathing during the procedure. The catheter is removed when the test is done. Pressure is placed on the area for 10 to 15 minutes to stop any bleeding. A bandage is then put on the wound. The arm or leg where the needle was placed should be kept straight for 6 hours after the procedure. You should avoid strenuous activity, such as heavy lifting, for 24 to 48 hours. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink anything for 6 to 8 hours before the test. You may be told to stop taking certain medicines, such as aspirin or other blood thinners for a short while before the test. Never stop taking any medicines unless told to do so by your provider.  Make sure your provider knows about all the medicines you take, including those you bought without a prescription. This includes herbs and supplements. Tell your provider if you: Are pregnant Are allergic to any medications Have ever had an  allergic reaction  to x-ray contrast material or iodine substances Have ever had any bleeding problems  How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-ray table is hard and cold. You may want to ask for a blanket or pillow. You may feel some stinging when the numbing medicine is injected. You may also feel some pressure as the catheter is moved. The dye can cause a feeling of warmth and flushing. This is normal and most often goes away in a few seconds. You may have tenderness and bruising at the site of the catheter insertion after the test. Seek immediate medical help if you have:  Swelling Bleeding that doesn't go away Severe pain in an arm or leg  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test if you have symptoms of a  narrowed or blocked blood vessel  in the arms, hands, legs, or feet. The test may also be done to diagnose: Bleeding Swelling or inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis)  Normal Results 
 
 The x-ray shows normal structures for your age. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result is commonly due to narrowing and hardening of the arteries in the arms or legs from plaque buildup ( hardening of the arteries ) in the artery walls. The x-ray may show a blockage in the vessels caused by: Aneurysms  (abnormal widening or ballooning of part of an artery) Blood clots Other diseases of the arteries  Abnormal results may also be due to: Inflammation of the blood vessels Injury to the blood vessels Thromboangiitis obliterans  (Buerger's disease) Takayasu's disease Risks 
 
 Complications may include: Allergic reaction to the contrast dye Blood clot that travels to the lungs Damage to the blood vessel as the needle and catheter are inserted Excessive bleeding or a blood clot where the catheter is inserted, which can reduce blood flow to the leg Heart attack or stroke Hematoma, a collection of blood at the site of the needle puncture Injury to the nerves at the needle puncture site Kidney damage from the dye  There is low-level radiation exposure. However, most experts feel that the risk of most x-rays is smaller than other risks we take every day. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. Alternative Names 
 
 Angiography of the extremity; Peripheral angiography; Lower extremity angiogram; Peripheral angiogram; Arteriography of the extremity References 
 
 Jackson JE, Meaney JFM. Angiography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 84. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Arteriogram 
 Blood clots 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Thromboangiitis obliterans 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 12/30/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia