
 Eyes - bulging 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bulging eyes is the abnormal protrusion (bulging out) of one or both eyeballs. Considerations 
 
 Prominent eyes may be a family trait. But prominent eyes are not the same as bulging eyes. Bulging eyes should be checked by a health care provider right away. Bulging of one eye, especially in a child, is a very serious sign. It should be checked right away. Hyperthyroidism  (particularly  Graves disease ) is the most common cause of bulging eyes. With this condition, the eyes do not blink often and seem to have a staring quality. Normally, there should be no visible white between the top of the iris (the colored part of the eye) and the upper eyelid. Seeing white in this area most often is a sign that the eye is bulging. Because eye changes develop slowly, family members may not notice it until the condition is fairly advanced. Photos often draw attention to the bulging when it may have gone unnoticed before. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Glaucoma Graves disease Hemangioma Histiocytosis Hyperthyroidism Hyperthyroidism caused by medications for other conditions Leukemia Neuroblastoma Orbital cellulitis  or  periorbital cellulitis Rhabdomyosarcoma Home Care 
 
 The cause needs to be treated by a health care provider. Because bulging eyes can cause a person to be self-conscious, emotional support is important. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have bulging eyes and the cause has not yet been diagnosed. Bulging eyes are accompanied by other symptoms.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The provider will ask about your medical history and do a physical exam. Some questions you may be asked include:  Are both eyes bulging? When did you first notice bulging eyes? Is it getting worse? What other symptoms do you have?  A  slit-lamp examination  may be done. Blood testing for thyroid disease may be done. Treatments depend on the cause. Artificial tears may be given to lubricate the eye. Alternative Names 
 
 Protruding eyes; Exophthalmos; Proptosis; Bulging eyes Images 
 
 
 Graves disease 
 Goiter 
 Periorbital cellulitis 
 References 
 
 Clemmons DR. Approach to the patient with endocrine disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 228. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 431. Read More 
 
 Graves disease 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia