
 Facial tics 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A facial tic is a repeated spasm, often involving the eyes and muscles of the face. Causes 
 
 Tics most often occur in children, but may last into adulthood. Tics occur 3 to 4 times as often in boys as girls. Tics may affect as many as one quarter of all children at some time. The cause of tics is unknown, but stress appears to make tics worse. Short-lived tics ( transient tic disorder ) are common in childhood. A  chronic motor tic disorder  also exists. It may last for years. This form is very rare compared to the common short-lived childhood tic.  Tourette syndrome  is a separate condition in which tics are a major symptom. Symptoms 
 
 Tics may involve repeated, uncontrolled spasm-like muscle movements, such as: 

 
  Eye blinking Grimacing Mouth twitching Nose wrinkling Squinting Repeated throat clearing or grunting may also be present. 
  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will usually diagnose a tic during a physical examination. No special tests are needed. In rare cases, an  EEG  may be done to look for  seizures , which can be the source of tics. Treatment 
 
 Short-lived childhood tics are not treated. Calling the child's attention to a tic may make it worse or cause it to continue. A non-stressful environment can make tics occur less often, and help them go away more quickly. Stress reduction programs may also be helpful. If tics severely affect a person's life, medicines may help control them. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Simple childhood tics should go away on their own over a period of months.  Chronic  tics may continue for a longer period of time. Possible Complications 
 
 In most cases, there are no complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if tics: 
   Affect many muscle groups
    
   Are persistent
    
   Are severe
    Prevention 
 
 Many cases cannot be prevented. Reducing stress may be helpful. Sometimes counseling can help your child learn how to cope with stress. Alternative Names 
 
 Tic - facial; Mimic spasm References 
 
 Ryan CA, Trieu ML, DeMaso DR, Walter HR. Motor disorders and habits. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 139. Singer HS. Tics and Tourette's syndrome. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Ferriero D, eds.  Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Chronic motor tic disorder 
 Tourette syndrome 
 Transient tic disorder 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Facial Injuries and Disorders 
 Movement Disorders 
 Tourette Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia