
 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy is  muscle weakness  and loss of muscle tissue that gets worse over time. Causes 
 
 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy affects the upper body. It is not the same as  Duchenne muscular dystrophy  and  Becker muscular dystrophy , which affect the lower body. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy is a genetic disorder. It appears in both men and women. It may develop in a child if either parent carries the gene for the disorder. In 10% to 30% of cases, the parents do not carry the gene. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy affects about 5 out of 100,000 people. It affects men and women equally. Symptoms 
 
 Men often have more symptoms than women. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy mainly affects the face, shoulder, and upper arm muscles. However, it can also affect muscles around the pelvis, hips, and lower leg. Symptoms can appear after birth, but often they do not appear until age 10 to 26. However, it is not uncommon for symptoms to appear much later in life. In some cases, symptoms never develop. Symptoms are most often mild and very slowly become worse. Muscle weakness of the face is common, and may include: Eyelid drooping Inability to whistle Decreased facial expression Depressed or angry facial expression Difficulty pronouncing words  Shoulder muscle weakness causes deformities such as pronounced shoulder blades (scapular winging) and sloping shoulders. The person has difficulty raising the arms because of shoulder and arm muscle weakness. Weakness of the lower legs is possible as the disorder gets worse. The weakness can be severe enough to interfere with walking. A small percentage of people use a wheelchair. Hearing loss and abnormal heart rhythms may occur, but are rare. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam will show weakness of the face and shoulder muscles. High blood pressure may be noted, but is usually mild. An eye exam may show changes in the blood vessels in the back of the eye. Tests that may be done include: Creatine kinase test  (may be slightly high) DNA testing Electrocardiogram  (EKG) EMG  (electromyography) Fluorescein angiography Genetic testing of chromosome 4 Hearing tests Muscle biopsy  (may confirm the diagnosis)  Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Treatments are given to control symptoms and improve quality of life. Activity is encouraged. Inactivity such as bedrest can make the muscle disease worse. Physical therapy may help maintain muscle strength. Other possible treatments include: Oral albuterol to increase muscle mass (but not strength) Speech therapy Surgery to fix a winged scapula Walking aids and foot support devices  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Disability is often minor. Lifespan is most often not affected. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Decreased mobility Decreased ability to care for self Deformities of the face and shoulders Hearing loss Vision loss (rare)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms of this condition develop. Genetic counseling is recommended for couples with a family history of this condition who wish to have children. Alternative Names 
 
 Landouzy-Dejerine muscular dystrophy Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Preston DC, Shapiro BE. Proximal, distal, and generalized weakness. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 27. Sarnat HB. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 609. Read More 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscular Dystrophy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia