
 Facial swelling 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Facial swelling is the buildup of fluid in the tissues of the face. Swelling may also affect the neck and upper arms. Considerations 
 
 If the facial swelling is mild, it may be hard to detect. Let the health care provider know the following: Pain, and where it hurts How long the swelling has lasted What makes it better or worse If you have other symptoms  Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Allergic reaction  ( allergic rhinitis , hay fever, or a  bee sting ) Angioedema Blood transfusion reaction Cellulitis Conjunctivitis  (inflammation of the eye) Drug reactions, including those due to aspirin, penicillin, sulfa, glucocorticoids, and others Head, nose, or jaw surgery Injury or trauma to the face (such as a burn) Malnutrition (when severe) Obesity Salivary gland disorders Sinusitis Stye  with swelling around the infected eye Tooth abscess Home Care 
 
 Apply cold compresses to reduce swelling from an injury. Raise the head of the bed (or use extra pillows) to help reduce facial swelling. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Sudden, painful, or severe facial swelling Facial swelling that lasts a while, particularly if it is getting worse over time Difficulty breathing Fever, tenderness, or redness, which suggests infection  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Emergency treatment is needed if facial swelling is caused by burns or if you have breathing problems. The health care provider will ask about your medical and personal history. This helps determine treatment or if any medical tests are needed. Questions may include: How long has the facial swelling lasted? When did it begin? What makes it worse? What makes it better? Have you come into contact with something you might be allergic to? What medicines are you taking? Did you recently injure your face? Did you have a medical test or surgery recently? What other symptoms do you have? For example:  facial pain , sneezing,  difficulty breathing ,  hives  or  rash ,  eye redness ,  fever .  Alternative Names 
 
 Puffy face; Swelling of the face; Moon face; Facial edema Images 
 
 
 Edema, central on the face 
 References 
 
 Amsterdam JT. Oral medicine. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 70. Habif TP. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Habif TP.  Clinical Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 6. Pfaff JA, Moore GP. Otolaryngology. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 72. Sharma R, Brunette DD. Ophthalmology. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 71. 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Edema 
 Facial Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia