
 Factor V deficiency 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Factor V deficiency is a condition that is passed down through families, which affects the ability of the blood to clot. Causes 
 
 Blood clotting is a complex process involving as many as 20 different  proteins  in blood plasma. These proteins are called blood coagulation factors.  Factor V deficiency is caused by a lack of Factor V. When certain blood clotting factors are low or missing, your blood does not clot properly.  Factor V deficiency is rare. It may be caused by:  A defective Factor V gene passed down through families (inherited) An antibody that interferes with normal Factor V function  You can get an antibody that interferes with Factor V: After giving birth After being treated with a certain type of fibrin glue After surgery With autoimmune diseases and certain cancers  Sometimes the cause is unknown. The disease is similar to  hemophilia , except bleeding into joints is less common. In the inherited form of Factor V deficiency, a family history of a  bleeding disorder  is a risk factor. Symptoms 
 
 Excessive bleeding with menstrual periods and after childbirth often occurs. Other symptoms can include:
 Bleeding into the skin Bleeding of the gums Excessive  bruising Nosebleeds Prolonged or excessive loss of blood with surgery or trauma Umbilical stump bleeding  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to detect Factor V deficiency include: Factor V assay Blood clotting tests, including  partial thromboplastin time  (PTT) and  prothrombin time Bleeding time Treatment 
 
 You will be given fresh blood plasma or fresh frozen plasma infusions during a bleeding episode or after surgery. These treatments will correct the deficiency temporarily. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is good with diagnosis and proper treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Severe bleeding (hemorrhage) could occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have an unexplained or prolonged loss of blood. Alternative Names 
 
 Parahemophilia; Owren disease; Bleeding disorder - Factor V deficiency Images 
 
 
 Blood clot formation 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 139. Ragni MV. Hemorrhagic disorders In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 174. Scott JP, Flood VH. Hereditary clotting factor deficiencies (bleeding disorders). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 476. Read More 
 
 Bleeding disorders 
 Hemophilia 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia