
 Factor VIII assay 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The factor VIII assay is a blood test to measure the activity of factor VIII. This is one of the proteins in the body that helps the blood clot. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to find the cause of too much bleeding (decreased blood clotting). Or, it may be ordered if a family member is known to have  hemophilia A . The test may also be done to see how well treatment for hemophilia A is working. Normal Results 
 
 A normal value is 50 to 200% of the laboratory control or reference value. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased factor VIII activity may be due to: Hemophilia A Disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become over active  disseminated intravascular coagulation  (DIC) Presence of a Factor VIII inhibitor (antibody) Von Willebrand's disease  (another type of bleeding disorder)  Increased activity may be due to: Older age Diabetes Liver disease Inflammation Pregnancy Obesity  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size so it may be harder to take a blood sample from one person than another. Other slight risks from having blood drawn may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  This test is most often done on people who have bleeding problems. The risk of too much bleeding is slightly greater for people with bleeding problems than others. Alternative Names 
 
 Plasma factor VIII antigen References 
 
 Carcao M, Moorehead P, Lillicrap D. Hemophilia A and B. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi, J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 137. Schmaier AH. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 131. Read More 
 
 Hemophilia 
 Hemophilia A 
 Von Willebrand disease 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemophilia 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia