
 Factor XII assay 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The factor XII assay is a blood test to measure the activity of factor XII. This is one of the proteins in the body that helps the blood clot. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Adults do not have to take any special steps to prepare for this test.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may want you to have this test if you had abnormal results on the  partial thromboplastin time (PTT) blood-clotting test . You may also need the test if a family member is known to have  factor XII deficiency . Normal Results 
 
 A normal value is 50 to 200% of the laboratory control or reference value. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased factor XII activity may indicate: Inherited (congenital) deficiency of factor XII Liver disease Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size so it may be harder to take a blood sample from one person than another. Other slight risks from having blood drawn may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Hageman factor assay References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 139. Schmaier AH. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 131. Read More 
 
 Factor XII (Hageman factor) deficiency 
 Liver disease 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia