
 Familial dysautonomia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Familial dysautonomia (FD) is an inherited disorder that affects nerves throughout the body. Causes 
 
 FD is passed down through families (inherited). A person must inherit a copy of the defective gene from each parent to develop the condition. FD occurs most often in people of Eastern European Jewish ancestry (Ashkenazi Jews). It is caused by a change (mutation) to a gene. It is rare in the general population. Symptoms 
 
 FD affects the nerves in the autonomic (involuntary) nervous system. These nerves manage daily body functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, bowel and bladder emptying, digestion, and the senses. Symptoms of FD are present at birth and may grow worse over time. Symptoms vary, and may include: Swallowing problems in infants, resulting in  aspiration pneumonia  or poor growth Breath-holding spells, resulting in fainting Constipation or diarrhea Inability to feel pain and changes in temperature (can lead to injuries) Dry eyes and lack of tears when crying Poor coordination and unsteady walk Seizures Unusually smooth, pale tongue surface and lack of taste buds and decrease in sense of taste After 3 years old, most children develop autonomic crises. These are episodes of vomiting with very high blood pressure, racing heart, fever, and sweating. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam to look for: Absent or decreased deep tendon reflexes Lack of a response after receiving a histamine injection (normally redness and swelling would occur) Lack of tears with crying Low muscle tone, most often in babies Severe curving of the spine ( scoliosis ) Tiny pupils after receiving certain eye drops  Blood tests are available to check for the gene mutation that causes FD. Treatment 
 
 FD can't be cured. Treatment is aimed at managing the symptoms and may include: Medicines to help prevent seizures Feeding in an upright position and giving textured formula to prevent  gastroesophageal reflux  (stomach acid and food coming back up, also called GERD) Measures to prevent low blood pressure when standing, such as increasing intake of fluid, salt, and caffeine, and wearing elastic stockings Medicines to control vomiting Medicines to prevent dry eyes Physical therapy of the chest Measures to protect against injury Providing enough nutrition and fluids Surgery or  spinal fusion  to treat spine problems Treating aspiration pneumonia
    Support Groups 
 
 These organizations can provide support and more information: Dysautonomia Foundation --  www.familialdysautonomia.org National Organization for Rare Disorders --  www.rarediseases.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Advances in diagnosis and treatment are increasing the survival rate. About half of babies born with FD will live to age 30. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms change or get worse. A genetic counselor can help teach you about the condition and direct you to support groups in your area. Prevention 
 
 Genetic DNA testing is very accurate for FD. It may be used for diagnosing people with the condition or those who carry the gene. It can also be used for prenatal diagnosis. People of Eastern European Jewish background and families with a history of FD may wish to seek  genetic counseling  if they are thinking of having children. Alternative Names 
 
 Riley-Day syndrome; FD; Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy - type III (HSAN III); Autonomic crises - familial dysautonomia Images 
 
 
 Chromosomes and DNA 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Sarnat HB. Autonomic neuropathies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 615. Wapner RJ. Prenatal diagnosis of congenital disorders. In: Creasy RK, Resnik R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ, Moore TR, Greene MF, eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Autosomal recessive 
 
 Review Date 10/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autonomic Nervous System Disorders 
 Degenerative Nerve Diseases 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia