
 Familial hypertriglyceridemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Familial hypertriglyceridemia is a common disorder passed down through families. It causes a higher-than-normal level of triglycerides (a type of fat) in a person's blood. The condition is not linked to major increases in other blood fat (cholesterol) levels. Causes 
 
 Familial hypertriglyceridemia is caused by a genetic defect, which is passed on in an  autosomal dominant  fashion. This means that if you get a bad copy of the gene from just one of your parents, you will have the condition. Some people with this condition also have high levels of  very low density lipoprotein  (VLDL). The reason for the rise in triglycerides and VLDL is not understood. In most cases, familial hypertriglyceridemia is not noticeable until puberty or early adulthood. Obesity, hyperglycemia (high blood glucose levels), and high levels of insulin are often present as well. These factors may cause even higher triglyceride levels. Alcohol and estrogen use can make the condition worse.  You are more likely to have this condition if you have a family history of hypertriglyceridemia or heart disease before age 50. Symptoms 
 
 You may not notice any symptoms. Some people with the condition may have coronary artery disease at an early age. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your family history and symptoms. If you have a family history of this condition, you should have blood tests to check  very low density lipoprotein  (VLDL) and triglyceride levels. Blood tests most often show a mild to moderate increase in triglycerides (about 200 to 500 mg/dL). A coronary risk profile may also be done. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control conditions that can raise triglyceride levels. These include  obesity ,  hypothyroidism , and  diabetes . Your provider may tell you not to drink alcohol. Certain birth control pills can raise triglyceride levels. Talk to your provider about your risk when deciding whether to take these medicines.  Treatment also involves avoiding excess calories and  foods high in saturated fats and carbohydrates . You may need to take medicine if your triglyceride levels stay high even after making diet changes. Nicotinic acid, gemfibrozil, and fenofibrate have been shown to lower triglyceride levels in people with this condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Losing weight and keeping diabetes under control helps improve the outcome.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Pancreatitis Coronary artery disease Prevention 
 
 Screening family members for  high triglycerides  may detect the disease early. Images 
 
 
 Healthy diet 
 References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Robinson JG. What is the role of advanced lipoprotein analysis in practice?  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(25):2607-2615. PMID: 23257303  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23257303 . Semenkovich CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Read More 
 
 Blood sugar test - blood 
 VLDL test 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Triglycerides 
 Browse the Encyclopedia