
 Farsightedness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Farsightedness is having a harder time seeing object that are close than things that are far away. Causes 
 
 Farsightedness is the result of the visual image being focused behind the  retina  rather than directly on it. It may be caused by the eyeball being too small or the focusing power being too weak. Farsightedness is often present from birth. However, children have a very flexible eye lens, which helps make up for the problem. As aging occurs, glasses or contact lenses may be needed to correct the vision. If you have family members who are farsighted, you are also more likely to become farsighted.  Watch this video about: Seeing Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Aching eyes Blurred vision  when looking at close objects Crossed eyes (strabismus) in some children Eye strain Headache while reading  Mild farsightedness may not cause any problems. However, you may need reading glasses.  Exams and Tests 
 
 A general eye exam to diagnose farsightedness may include the following tests: Eye movement testing Glaucoma testing Refraction test Retinal examination Slit-lamp examination Visual acuity This list is not all-inclusive.  Treatment 
 
 Farsightedness is easily corrected with glasses or contact lenses. Surgery is available for correcting farsightedness in adults. This is an option for those who do not wish to wear glasses or contacts. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is expected to be good. Possible Complications 
 
 Farsightedness can be a risk factor for  glaucoma  and crossed eyes. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or eye doctor if you have symptoms of farsightedness and you have not had a recent eye exam. Also, call if vision begins to get worse after you have been diagnosed with farsightedness. See a provider right away if you think you have farsightedness and you suddenly develop the following symptoms: Severe eye pain Eye redness Decreased vision Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperopia Images 
 
 
 Visual acuity test 
 Normal, nearsightedness, and farsightedness 
 Normal vision 
 Lasik eye surgery - series 
 References 
 
 Miller D, Schol P, Magnante P. Optics of the normal eye. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 2.5.  Yanoff M, Cameron JD. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Glaucoma 
 Retina 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Refractive Errors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia