
 Fatty liver - nonalcoholic 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the buildup of fat in the liver that is NOT caused by drinking too much alcohol. People who have it do not have a history of heavy drinking. NAFLD is closely related to being overweight.  For many people, NAFLD causes no symptoms or problems. A more serious form of the disease is called non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). NASH can cause liver failure. It can also cause cancer. Causes 
 
 There is no clear cause for NAFLD or NASH. However, certain things may put you at risk: Overweight or  obesity . The more overweight you are, the higher the risk. Prediabetes  (insulin resistance) Type 2 diabetes High cholesterol High triglycerides High blood pressure  Other risk factors may include: Rapid weight loss and poor diet Gastric bypass surgery Bowel disease Certain medicines, such as calcium channel blockers and some cancer drugs  NAFLD also occurs in people who have no known risk factors. Symptoms 
 
 Often, people with NAFLD have no symptoms. When symptoms occur, the most common include: Fatigue Pain in the upper right abdomen  In people with NASH who have  liver damage , symptoms may include: Weakness Loss of appetite Nausea Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice) Itching Fluid buildup and swelling in the legs and abdomen Mental confusion GI bleeding  Exams and Tests 
 
 NAFLD is often found during  routine blood tests  that are used to see how well the liver is working. You may have the following tests to measure liver function: Complete blood count Prothrombin time Blood albumin level Your health care provider may ask for certain imaging tests, including: Ultrasound is often used to confirm a diagnosis of NAFLD MRI  and  CT scan  may also be needed  A  liver biopsy  is needed to confirm a diagnosis of NASH, the more severe form of NAFLD. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for NAFLD. The goal is to manage your risk factors and any health conditions. Your provider will help you understand your condition and the healthy choices that can help you take care of your liver. These may include: Losing weight if you are overweight. Eating a healthy diet that is low in salt. Not drinking alcohol. Staying physically active. Managing health conditions such as diabetes and high blood pressure. Getting vaccinated for diseases such as hepatitis A and hepatitis B. Lowering your cholesterol and triglyceride levels. Taking medicines as directed. Talk to your provider about all medicines you take, including herbs and supplements and over-the-counter medicines. Losing weight and managing diabetes can slow or sometimes reverse the deposit of fat in the liver. Outlook(Prognosis) 
 
 Many people with NAFLD have no health problems and do not go on to develop NASH. Losing weight and making healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent more serious problems.  It is unclear why some people develop NASH. NASH can lead to  cirrhosis . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Most people with NAFLD do not know they have it. See your provider if you begin to have unusual symptoms such as fatigue or abdominal pain. Prevention 
 
 To help prevent NAFLD: Maintain a healthy weight Eat a healthy diet Exercise regularly Limit alcohol consumption Use medicines properly Alternative Names 
 
 Fatty liver; Steatosis; Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; NASH Images 
 
 
 Liver 
 References 
 
 Chalasani N, Younossi Z, Lavine JE, Diehl AM, Brunt EM, Cusi K, Charlton M, Sanyal AJ; American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; American College of Gastroenterology; American Gastroenterological Association. The diagnosis and management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: Practice guideline by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, American College of Gastroenterology, and the American Gastroenterological Association.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2012 Jun;107(6):811-26. PMID: 22641309  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22641309 . Reid AE. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 85. 
 Review Date 5/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia