
 Febrile/cold agglutinins 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Agglutinins are  antibodies  that cause the red blood cells to clump together. Cold agglutinins are active at cold temperatures. Febrile (warm) agglutinins are active at normal body temperatures. This article describes the blood test that is used to measure the level of these antibodies in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample is needed . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing where the needle was inserted. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to diagnose certain infections and find the cause of  hemolytic anemia  (a type of anemia that occurs when red blood cells are destroyed). Knowing whether there are warm or cold agglutinins can help explain why the hemolytic anemia is occurring and direct treatment. Normal Results 
 
 Normal results are: Warm agglutinins: no agglutination in titers at or below 1:80 Cold agglutinins: no agglutination in titers at or below 1:16 The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal (positive) result means there were agglutinins in your blood sample. Warm agglutinins may occur with: Infections, including  brucellosis ,  rickettsial disease ,  salmonella infection , and  tularemia Inflammatory bowel disease Lymphoma Systemic lupus erythematosus Use of certain medicines, including methyldopa, penicillin, and quinidine  Cold agglutinins may occur with: Infections, especially mononucleous and mycoplasma pneumonia Chicken pox (varicella) Cytomegalovirus infection Cancer, including lymphoma and  multiple myeloma Listeria monocytogenes Systemic lupus erythematosus Waldenström macrogolulinemia  Risks 
 
 Risks are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting  or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Considerations 
 
 If a disease linked to cold agglutinin is suspected, the person needs to be kept warm. Alternative Names 
 
 Cold agglutinins; Weil-Felix reaction; Widal test; Warm agglutinins; Agglutinins Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Baum SG. Mycoplasma infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 317. Jäger U, Lechner K. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 44. Michel M. Autoimmune and intravascular hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 160. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Brucellosis 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Q fever - early 
 Salmonella enterocolitis 
 Tularemia 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia