
 Fecal fat 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The fecal fat test measures the amount of fat in the stool. This can help gauge the percentage of dietary fat that the body does not absorb. How the Test is Performed 
 
 There are many ways to collect the samples.  For adults and children, you can catch the stool on plastic wrap that is loosely placed over the toilet bowl and held in place by the toilet seat. Then put the sample in a clean container. One test kit supplies a special toilet tissue that you use to collect the sample, then put the sample in a clean container. For infants and children wearing diapers, you can line the diaper with plastic wrap. If the plastic wrap is placed properly, you can prevent mixing of urine and stool. This will provide a better sample. Collect all stool that is released over a 24-hour period (or sometimes 3 days) in the containers provided. Label the containers with name, time, and date, and send them to the lab. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Eat a normal diet containing about 100 grams (g) of fat per day for 3 days before starting the test. The health care provider may ask you to stop using drugs or  food additives  that could affect the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal bowel movements. There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test evaluates fat absorption to tell how well the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and intestines are working. Fat  malabsorption  can cause a change in your stools called steatorrhea. To absorb fat normally, the body needs  bile  from the gallbladder (or liver if the gallbladder has been removed), enzymes from the pancreas, and normal intestines. Normal Results 
 
 Less than 7 g of fat per 24 hours. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased fat absorption may be caused by: Biliary  cancer Biliary stricture Celiac disease Chronic pancreatitis Crohn disease Cystic fibrosis Gallstones ( cholelithiasis ) Pancreatic cancer Pancreatitis Radiation enteritis Short bowel syndrome  (for example from surgery or an inherited problem) Sprue Whipple disease Small bowel bacterial overgrowth  Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 Factors that interfere with the test are: Enemas Laxatives Mineral oil Alternative Names 
 
 Quantitative stool fat determination; Fat absorption Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Hogenauer C, Hammer HF. Maldigestion and malabsorption. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 104. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Bile duct stricture 
 Cancer 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 Crohn disease 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Gallstones 
 Malabsorption 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Radiation enteritis 
 Short bowel syndrome 
 Whipple disease 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Cancer 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Celiac Disease 
 Crohn's Disease 
 Cystic Fibrosis 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Gallstones 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia