
 Fecal smear 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fecal smear is a laboratory test to for a stool sample. This test is done to check for bacteria and other organisms. Presence of organisms in stool shows diseases in the digestive tract. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A stool sample is needed. There are many ways to collect the sample. You can collect the sample: On plastic wrap. Place the wrap loosely over the toilet bowl so that it is held in place by the toilet seat. Put the sample in a clean container given to you by your health care provider. In a test kit that supplies a special toilet tissue. Put it in a clean container given to you by your provider.  Do not mix urine, water, or toilet tissue with the sample. For children wearing diapers: Line the diaper with plastic wrap. Position the plastic wrap so that it will prevent urine and stool from mixing. This will provide a better sample. Put the sample in a container given to you by your health care provider.  Make sure you follow your provider's instructions for returning the sample. Return the sample to the lab as soon as possible.  The stool sample is sent to a lab where a small amount is placed on a slide. The slide is placed under a microscope and checked for the presence of bacteria, fungi, parasites, or viruses. A stain may be placed on the sample that highlights certain germs under the microscope. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no preparation needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have severe  diarrhea  that will not go away or that keeps returning. The test result may be used to select the correct antibiotic treatment. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means there are no disease-causing germs present. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means that abnormal germs have been found in the stool sample. This may be due to an infection of the digestive tract. Risks 
 
 There are no risks associated with a fecal smear. Alternative Names 
 
 Stool smear Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Beavis, KG, Charnot-Katsikas, A. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 64. DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Hall GS, Woods GL. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 58. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140.  Siddiqi HA, Salwen MJ, Shaikh MF. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrintestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 22.  Read More 
 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Diarrhea 
 Browse the Encyclopedia