
 Fecal culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A fecal culture is a lab test to find organisms in the stool (feces) that can cause gastrointestinal symptoms and disease. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A stool sample is needed. There are many ways to collect the sample.  You can collect the sample: On plastic wrap. Place the wrap loosely over the toilet bowl so that it is held in place by the toilet seat. Put the sample in a clean container given to you by your health care provider. In a test kit that supplies a special toilet tissue. Put it in a clean container given to you by your provider.  Do not mix urine, water, or toilet tissue with the sample. For children wearing diapers: Line the diaper with plastic wrap. Position the plastic wrap so that it will prevent urine and stool from mixing. This will provide a better sample.  Return the sample to the laboratory as soon as possible. Do not include toilet paper or urine in the specimen.  In the lab, a technician places a sample of the specimen in a special dish. The dish is then filled with a gel that boosts the growth of bacteria or other germs. If there is growth, the germs are identified. The lab technician may also do more tests to determine the best treatment. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will get a collection container for the stool specimen.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed when your health care provider suspects that you may have a gastrointestinal infection. It may be done if you have severe  diarrhea  that does not go away or that keeps coming back. Normal Results 
 
 There are no abnormal bacteria or other organisms in the sample. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may mean you have an  intestinal infection . Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 Often other stool tests are done in addition to the culture, such as: Gram stain of stool Fecal smear Stool ova and parasites exam Alternative Names 
 
 Stool culture; Culture - stool; Gastroenteritis fecal culture Images 
 
 
 Salmonella typhi organism 
 Yersinia enterocolitica organism 
 Campylobacter jejuni organism 
 Clostridium difficile organism 
 References 
 
 Beavis, KG, Charnot-Katsikas, A. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 64. DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Hall GS, Woods GL. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 58. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140.  Siddiqi HA, Salwen MJ, Shaikh MF. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrintestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 22.  Read More 
 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Cryptosporidium enteritis 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Diarrhea 
 Foodborne Illness 
 Gastroenteritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia