
 Fiber 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fiber is a substance found in plants. Dietary fiber, which is the type of fiber you can eat, is found in fruits, vegetables, and grains. It is an important part of a healthy diet. Function 
 
 Dietary fiber adds bulk to your diet. Because it makes you feel full faster, it can help with weight control. Fiber aids digestion and helps prevent  constipation . It is sometimes used for the treatment of  diverticulosis ,  diabetes , and  heart disease . Food Sources 
 
 There are two forms of fiber: soluble and insoluble. Soluble fiber attracts water and turns to gel during digestion. This slows digestion. Soluble fiber is found in oat bran, barley, nuts, seeds, beans, lentils, peas, and some fruits and vegetables. Research has shown that soluble fiber lowers cholesterol, which can help prevent heart disease. Insoluble fiber is found in foods such as wheat bran, vegetables, and whole grains. It appears to speed the passage of foods through the stomach and intestines and adds bulk to the stool. Side Effects 
 
 Eating a large amount of fiber in a short period of time can cause intestinal gas ( flatulence ),  bloating , and  abdominal cramps . This problem often goes away once the natural bacteria in the digestive system get used to the increase in fiber. Adding fiber to the diet slowly, instead of all at one time, can help reduce gas or  diarrhea . Too much fiber may interfere with the absorption of minerals such as iron, zinc, magnesium, and calcium. In most cases, this is not a cause for too much concern because high-fiber foods tend to be rich in minerals. Recommendations 
 
 On average, Americans now eat about 16 grams of fiber per day. The recommendation for older children, adolescents, and adults is to eat  21 to 38 grams of fiber each day. Younger children will not be able to eat enough calories to achieve this amount, but it is a good idea to introduce whole grains, fresh fruits, and other high-fiber foods. To ensure that you get enough fiber, eat a variety of foods, including: Cereals Dried beans and peas Fruits Vegetables Whole grains  Add fiber gradually over a period of a few weeks to avoid stomach distress. Water helps fiber pass through the digestive system. Drink plenty of fluids (about 8 glasses of water or noncaloric fluid a day). Taking the peels off fruits and vegetables reduces the amount of fiber you get from the food. Fiber-rich foods offer health benefits when eaten raw or cooked.  Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - fiber; Roughage; Bulk; Constipation - fiber Images 
 
 
 Sources of fiber 
 References 
 
 Hoy MK, Goldman JD. Fiber intake of the US population. What we eat in America, NHANES 2009-2010. Food Surveys Research Group. Dietary Data Brief No. 12. September 2014.  www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/80400530/pdf/DBrief/12_fiber_intake_0910.pdf . Accessed July 10, 2016. Heimburger DC. Nutrition's interface with health and disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 213. National Research Council. Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids (macronutrients).  The National Academies Press.  Washington, DC; 2005:chap 7. Thompson M, Noel MB. Nutrition and family medicine. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 37. US Department of Health and Human Services and US Department of Agriculture. 2015-2020 Dietary guidelines for Americans. 8th ed.  www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ . Accessed July 10, 2016.  Read More 
 
 Constipation in infants and children 
 Diabetes 
 Diverticulitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Constipation - what to ask your doctor 
 High-fiber foods 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dietary Fiber 
 Browse the Encyclopedia