
 Fire ants 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fire ants are red-colored insects. A sting from a fire ant delivers a harmful substance, called venom, into your skin. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual fire ant sting. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Fire ant venom contains a chemical called piperidine. Where Found 
 
 Fire ants build dirt nests that form mounds, usually in open, grassy settings. They are typically found in the southern United States and other areas that do not freeze in winter. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a fire ant sting may include: Swelling , redness, itchiness, and pain around the site of the bite Pus-filled blisters that last 3 to 8 days Possible scab at the area of the bite that lasts 3 to 10 days  Those allergic to fire ant venom may also have: Difficulty breathing Rapid heart rate Throat swelling  Home Care 
 
 Home treatment depends on the location of, and reaction to, the sting. Wash the exposed area with plenty of soap and water. DO NOT use alcohol to wash the area. Wash the eyes with plenty of water if any venom gets in them. For mild stings, place ice (wrapped in a clean cloth) on the bite area for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has problems with blood circulation, decrease the time to prevent possible damage to the skin. Some people are allergic to fire ant venom. If the reaction is severe, seek medical help right away and call your local emergency number (such as 911) or poison control. Those who have an allergy to insect bites or stings should carry a bee sting kit and know how to use it an emergency. These kits require a prescription. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The type of insect, if possible Time of the bite  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The wound will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Breathing support, including oxygen EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The sooner appropriate treatment is started, the better the outcome. People who are not allergic to fire ants should be fine in a few hours to a few days. People with severe allergic reactions may need to stay in the hospital. Images 
 
 
 Insect bites on the legs 
 References 
 
 Nogar JN, Clark RF. Arthropod bites and stings. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 140. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine - Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. 
 Review Date 7/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washington. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Insect Bites and Stings 
 Browse the Encyclopedia