
 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is scar tissue in the filtering unit of the kidney. This structure is called the glomerulus. The glomeruli serve as filters that help the body get rid of harmful substances. Each kidney has thousands of glomeruli.  "Focal" means that some of the glomeruli become scarred. Others remain normal. "Segmental" means that only part of an individual glomerulus is damaged. Causes 
 
 The cause of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is often unknown. The condition affects both children and adults. It occurs slightly more often in men and boys. It is also more common in African Americans. Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis causes up to a quarter of all cases of  nephrotic syndrome . Known causes include: Drugs such as heroin, bisphosphonates, anabolic steroids Infection Inherited genetic problems Obesity Reflux nephropathy  (a condition in which urine flows backward from the bladder to the kidney) Sickle cell disease Some medicines  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Foamy urine (from excess protein in the urine) Poor appetite Swelling, called generalized  edema , from fluids held in the body Weight gain  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This exam may show tissue swelling (edema) and high blood pressure. Signs of kidney (renal) failure and excess fluid may develop as the condition gets worse. Tests may include: Kidney biopsy Kidney function tests  (blood and urine) Urinalysis Urine microscopy Urine protein Treatment 
 
 Treatments may include: Medicines to reduce the body's inflammatory response. Medicines to lower blood pressure. Some of these medicines also help reduce the amount of protein that spills into the urine. Medicines to get rid of excess fluid (diuretic or "water pill") Low sodium diet  to reduce swelling and lower blood pressure  The goal of treatment is to control the symptoms of nephrotic syndrome and prevent  chronic kidney failure . These treatments may include: Antibiotics to control infections Fluid restriction Low-fat diet Low- or moderate-protein diet Vitamin D  supplements Dialysis Kidney transplant Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 More than half of those with focal or segmental glomerulosclerosis develop chronic kidney failure within 10 years. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include:  Chronic kidney failure End-stage kidney disease Infection Malnutrition Nephrotic syndrome  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of this condition, especially if there is: Fever Pain with urination Decreased urine output Prevention 
 
 No prevention is known. Alternative Names 
 
 Segmental glomerulosclerosis; Focal sclerosis with hyalinosis Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Appel GB, Radhakrishnan J. Glomerular disorders and nephrotic syndromes In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 121. Korbet S. Treatment of primary FSGS in adults.  JASN . 2012;23(11):1769-76. PMID: 22997260  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22997260 .  Nachman PH, Jennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Protein urine test 
 Reflux nephropathy 
 
 Review Date 5/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, Private Practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia