
 Fragile X syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fragile X syndrome is a genetic condition involving changes in part of the X chromosome. It is the most common form of inherited  intellectual disability  in boys. Causes 
 
 Fragile X syndrome is caused by a change in a gene called  FMR1 . A small part of the gene code is repeated on a fragile area of the X chromosome. The more repeats, the more likely the condition will occur. The  FMR1  gene makes a protein needed for your brain to function properly. A defect in the gene makes your body produce too little of the protein, or none at all. Boys and girls can both be affected, but because boys have only one X chromosome, a single fragile X is likely to affect them more severely. You can have fragile X syndrome even if your parents do not have it. A family history of fragile X syndrome, developmental problems, or intellectual disability may not be present. Symptoms 
 
 Behavior problems associated with fragile X syndrome include: Autism spectrum disorder Delay in crawling, walking, or twisting Hand clapping or hand biting Hyperactive or impulsive behavior Intellectual disability Speech and language delay Tendency to avoid eye contact  Physical signs may include: Flat feet Flexible joints and low muscle tone Large body size Large forehead or ears with a prominent jaw Long face Soft skin  Some of these problems are present at birth, while others may not develop until after puberty. Family members who have fewer repeats in the  FMR1  gene may not have intellectual disability. Women may have premature  menopause  or difficulty becoming pregnant. Both men and women may have problems with tremors and poor coordination. Exams and Tests 
 
 There are very few outward signs of fragile X syndrome in babies. Some things the health care provider may look for include: Large head circumference in babies Intellectual disability Large testicles after the start of puberty Subtle differences in face features In females, excess shyness may be the only sign of the disorder. Genetic testing can diagnose this disease. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for fragile X syndrome. Instead, training and education have been developed to help affected children function at the highest possible level. Clinical trials are ongoing ( www.clinicaltrials.gov ) and looking at several possible medicines for treating fragile X syndrome. Support Groups 
 
 National Fragile X Foundation:  www.fragilex.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the amount of intellectual disability. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications vary, depending on the type and severity of symptoms. They may include: Recurrent infections in children Seizure disorder Fragile X syndrome can be a cause of autism or related disorders, although not all children with fragile X syndrome have these conditions. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be helpful if you have a family history of this syndrome and are planning to become pregnant. Alternative Names 
 
 Martin-Bell syndrome; Marker X syndrome References 
 
 Saul RA, Tarleton JC.  FMR1 -related disorders.  GeneReviews . Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2012:4. PMID: 20301558  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301558 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Shapiro BK, Batshaw ML. Intellectual disability. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Chromosome 
 Intellectual disability 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fragile X Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia