
 Frequent or urgent urination 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Frequent urination means needing to urinate more often than usual. Urgent urination is a sudden, strong urge to urinate. This causes a discomfort in your bladder. Urgent urination makes it difficult to delay using the toilet. A frequent need to urinate at night is called  nocturia . Most people can sleep for 6 to 8 hours without having to urinate. Causes 
 
 Common causes of these symptoms are: Urinary tract infection  (UTI) Enlarged prostate  in middle-aged and older men Leakage of urine from the urethra  (the tube that carries urine out of your body) Swelling and infection of the urethra Vaginitis (swelling or discharge of the vulva and vagina)  Less common causes include: Alcohol use Anxiety Bladder cancer  (not common) Drinking caffeine Diabetes that is not well controlled Pregnancy Interstitial cystitis Medicines such as water pills (diuretics) Overactive bladder syndrome Radiation therapy to the pelvis, which is used to treat certain cancers Stroke and other brain or nervous system diseases Tumor or growth in the pelvis  Home Care 
 
 Follow the advice of your health care provider to treat the cause of the problem.  It may help to write down the times when you urinate and the amount of urine you produce. Bring this record to your visit with the provider. This is called a voiding diary. In some cases, you may have problems controlling urine ( incontinence ) for a period of time. You may need to take steps to protect your clothing and bedding. For nighttime urination, avoid drinking too much fluid before going to bed. Cut down on the amount of liquids you drink that contain alcohol or caffeine.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if: 
  You have fever, back or side pain, vomiting, or shaking chills
    
  You have increased thirst or appetite, fatigue, or sudden weight loss
    Also call your provider if: 
   You have urinary frequency or urgency, but you are not pregnant and you are not drinking large amounts of fluid.
    You have incontinence or you have changed your lifestyle because of your symptoms. You have bloody or cloudy urine. There is a discharge from the penis or vagina.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take a medical history and do a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Urinalysis Urine culture Cystometry  (a measurement of the pressure within the bladder) Cystoscopy Nervous system tests (for some urgency problems) Ultrasound  (such as an  abdominal ultrasound  or a  pelvic ultrasound ) Treatment depends on the cause of the urgency and frequency. You may need to take antibiotics and medicine to ease your discomfort. Alternative Names 
 
 Urgent urination; Urinary frequency or urgency; Urgency-frequency syndrome; Overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome; Urge syndrome Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Drake MJ. Overactive bladder. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 76. Zeidel ML. Obstructive uropathy. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 123. Read More 
 
 Urinating more at night 
 
 Review Date 5/23/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Enlarged Prostate (BPH) 
 Overactive Bladder 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia