
 Frontal bossing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Frontal bossing is an unusually prominent forehead. It is sometimes associated with a heavier than normal brow ridge. Considerations 
 
 Frontal bossing is seen only in a few rare syndromes, including acromegaly, a long-term (chronic) disorder caused by too much growth hormone, which leads to enlargement of the bones of the face, jaw, hands, feet, and skull. Causes 
 
 Causes include: Acromegaly Basal cell nevus syndrome Congenital syphilis Cleidocranial dysostosis Crouzon syndrome Hurler syndrome Pfeiffer syndrome Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Russell-Silver syndrome  (Russell-Silver dwarf) Use of the antiseizure drug trimethadione during pregnancy  Home Care 
 
 There is no home care needed for frontal bossing. Home care for disorders associated with frontal bossing varies with the specific disorder.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you notice that your child's forehead looks overly prominent, talk to your health care provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 An infant or child with frontal bossing generally has other symptoms and signs. Taken together, these define a specific syndrome or condition. The diagnosis is based on a family history, medical history, and thorough physical evaluation. Medical history questions documenting frontal bossing in detail may include: When did you first notice the problem? What other symptoms are present? Have you noticed any other unusual physical characteristics? Has a disorder been identified as the cause of the frontal bossing? If so, what was the diagnosis?  Lab studies may be ordered to confirm the presence of a suspected disorder. Images 
 
 
 Frontal bossing 
 References 
 
 Herring JA. Skeletal dysplasias. In: Herring JA, ed.  Tachdjian's Pediatric Orthopaedics . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 40. Kinsman SL, Johnston MV. Congenital anomalies of the central nervous system. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 591. Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia