
 Frostbite 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Frostbite is damage to the skin and underlying tissues caused by extreme cold. Frostbite is the most common freezing injury. Causes 
 
 Frostbite occurs when the skin and body tissues are exposed to cold temperature for a long period of time.  You are more likely to develop frostbite if you: Take medicines called beta-blockers Have  poor blood supply to the legs Smoke Have diabetes Have  Raynaud phenomenon Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of frostbite may include: Pins and needles feeling, followed by numbness Hard, pale, and cold skin that has been exposed to the cold for too long Aching, throbbing or lack of feeling in the affected area Red and extremely painful skin and muscle as the area thaws Very severe frostbite may cause: Blisters Gangrene (blackened, dead tissue) Damage to tendons, muscles, nerves, and bone Frostbite may affect any part of the body. The hands, feet, nose, and ears are the places most prone to the problem.  If the frostbite did not affect your blood vessels, a complete recovery is possible. If the frostbite affected the blood vessels, the damage is permanent. Gangrene may occur. This may require removal of the affected body part (amputation).  First Aid 
 
 A person with frostbite on the arms or legs may also have hypothermia (lowered body temperature). Check for hypothermia and treat those symptoms first. Take the following steps if you think someone might have frostbite: Shelter the person from the cold and move him or her to a warmer place. Remove any tight jewelry and wet clothes. Look for signs of hypothermia (lowered body temperature) and treat that condition first. If you can get quick medical help, it is best to wrap the damaged areas in sterile dressings. Remember to separate affected fingers and toes. Transport the person to an emergency department for further care. If medical help is not nearby, you may give the person rewarming first aid. Soak the affected areas in warm (never hot) water -- for 20 to 30 minutes. For ears, nose, and cheeks, apply a warm cloth repeatedly. The recommended water temperature is 104째F to 108째F (40째C to 42.2째C). Keep circulating the water to aid the warming process. Severe burning pain, swelling, and color changes may occur during warming. Warming is complete when the skin is soft and feeling returns. Apply dry, sterile dressings to the frostbitten areas. Put dressings between frostbitten fingers or toes to keep them separated. Move thawed areas as little as possible. Refreezing of thawed extremities can cause more severe damage. Prevent refreezing by wrapping the thawed areas and keeping the person warm. If protection from refreezing cannot be guaranteed, it may be better to delay the initial rewarming process until a warm, safe location is reached. If the frostbite is severe, give the person warm drinks to replace lost fluids.  DO NOT 
 
 In case of frostbite DO NOT: Thaw out a frostbitten area if it cannot be kept thawed. Refreezing may make tissue damage even worse. Use direct dry heat (such as a radiator, campfire, heating pad, or hair dryer) to thaw the frostbitten areas. Direct heat can burn the tissues that are already damaged. Rub or massage the affected area. Disturb blisters on frostbitten skin. Smoke or drink alcoholic beverages during recovery as both can interfere with blood circulation. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You had severe frostbite Normal feeling and color do not return promptly after home treatment for mild frostbite Frostbite has occurred recently and new symptoms develop, such as  fever , general ill-feeling, skin discoloration, or drainage from the affected body part  Prevention 
 
 Be aware of factors that can contribute to frostbite. These include extreme: Wet clothes High winds Poor blood circulation. Poor circulation can be caused by tight clothing or boots, cramped positions,  fatigue , certain medicines, smoking,  alcohol use , or diseases that affect the blood vessels, such as diabetes.  Wear clothing that protects you well against the cold. Protect exposed areas. In cold weather, wear mittens (not gloves); wind-proof, water-resistant, layered clothing; 2 pairs of socks; and a hat or scarf that covers the ears (to avoid heat loss through the scalp). If you expect to be exposed to the cold for a long period of time, do not drink alcohol or smoke. Make sure to get enough food and rest. If caught in a severe snowstorm, find shelter early or increase physical activity to maintain body warmth. Alternative Names 
 
 Cold exposure - arms or legs Images 
 
 
 First aid kit 
 Frostbite - hands 
 Frostbite 
 References 
 
 Danzl DF, Zafren K. Accidental hypothermia. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 140. Sawka MN, O'Connor FG. Disorders due to heat and cold. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 109. Zafren K, Danzl DF. Frostbite. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 139. Read More 
 
 Hypothermia 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Paleness 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Frostbite 
 Browse the Encyclopedia