
 Fuel oil poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fuel oil poisoning occurs when someone swallows, breathes in (inhales), or touches fuel oil. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Substances called hydrocarbons are the harmful ingredients in fuel oil. Where Found 
 
 These substances are found in: Fuel oil Kerosene There may be other sources of fuel oil. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of fuel oil poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Pain in the throat Pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue STOMACH AND INTESTINES Abdominal pain Blood in the stool Diarrhea Nausea Vomiting, (may contain blood) HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly LUNGS Breathing difficulty (from breathing the fumes) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty) NERVOUS SYSTEM Convulsions Depression Difficulty concentrating Dizziness Drowsiness Feeling of being drunk (euphoria) Headaches Lightheadedness Loss of alertness (unconsciousness) Seizures Staggering Weakness SKIN Blisters Burn Irritation Peeling of the skin Home Care 
 
 Get medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the fuel oil is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the fuel oil, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. Do NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in fumes, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator) Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much fuel oil they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, and stomach are possible. The outcome depends on the extent of this damage. Damage can continue to occur for several weeks after swallowing fuel oil. The main danger from swallowing kerosene is that it can also go into your lungs. It can also get into your lungs if you throw up kerosene you have swallowed. Getting a large amount into your lungs can cause serious lung damage. It can also cause you to stop breathing. References 
 
 Gummin DD. Hydrocarbons. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 152. Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls, RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap158. Mirkin DB. Benzene and related aromatic hydrocarbons. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 94. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia