
 Fussy or irritable child 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Young children who cannot talk yet will let you know when something is wrong by acting fussy or irritable. If your child is fussier than usual, it could be a sign that something is wrong. Causes 
 
 It is normal for children to get fussy or whiny sometimes. There are lots of reasons why children get fussy: Lack of sleep Hunger Frustration Fight with a sibling Being too hot or too cold  Your child also may be worried about something. Ask yourself if there has been stress, sadness, or anger in your home. Young children are sensitive to stress at home, and to the mood of their parents or caregivers.  A baby who cries for longer than 3 hours a day might have colic. Learn ways that you can  help your baby with colic . Many common childhood illnesses can cause a child to be fussy. Most illnesses are easily treated. They include: Ear infection Teething or a toothache Cold or flu Bladder infection Stomach pain or stomach flu Headache Constipation Pinworm Poor sleep patterns  Although less common, your child's fussiness may be an early sign of a more serious problem, such as: Diabetes, asthma, anemia (low blood count), or other health problem Serious infections, such as an infection in the  lungs ,  kidneys , or around  the brain Head injury that you did not see happen Hearing or speech problems Autism or abnormal brain development (if fussiness does not go away and becomes more severe) Depression or other mental health problems Pain, such as headache or stomach ache Home Care 
 
 Soothe your child as you would normally. Try rocking, cuddling, talking, or doing things your child finds calming. Address other factors that may be causing fussiness: Poor sleep patterns Noise or stimulation around your child (too much or too little can be a problem) Stress around the home Irregular day-to-day schedule  Using your parenting skills, you should be able to calm your child and make things better. Getting your child on a regular eating, sleeping, and daily schedule can also help. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 As a parent, you know your child's usual behavior. If your child is more irritable than usual and cannot be comforted, contact your child's health care provider. Watch for and report other symptoms, such as: Belly pain Crying that persists Fast breathing Fever Poor appetite Racing heartbeat Rash Vomiting or diarrhea Sweating  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your child's health care provider will work with you to learn why your child is irritable. During the office visit, the provider will: Ask questions and take a history Examine your child Order lab tests, if needed Alternative Names 
 
 Inconsolability; irritability Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Saunders M, Gorelick MH. The acutely ill child. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme III JW, et al., eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap. 60.  Read More 
 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Stimulus 
 
 Review Date 9/1/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Common Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia