
 Gallbladder removal - open 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Open gallbladder removal is surgery to remove the gallbladder through a large cut in your abdomen. Description 
 
 Surgery is done while you are under  general anesthesia  so you will be asleep and pain-free. To perform the surgery: The surgeon makes a 5 to 7 inch (12.5 to 17.5 centimeters) cut in the upper right part of your belly, just below your ribs. The area is opened up so the surgeon can view the gallbladder and separate it from the other organs. The surgeon cuts the bile duct and blood vessels that lead to the gallbladder. The gallbladder is gently lifted out and removed from your body.  An x-ray called a  cholangiogram  may be done during your surgery.  To do this test, dye is injected into your common bile duct and an x-ray is taken. The dye helps find stones that may be outside your gallbladder. If other stones are found, the surgeon may remove them with a special instrument. The surgery takes about 1 hour. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 You may need this surgery if you have pain or other symptoms from gallstones. You may also need surgery if your gallbladder is not working normally. Common symptoms may include: Indigestion , including bloating, heartburn, and gas  Nausea and vomiting Pain after eating, usually in the upper right or upper middle area of your  belly  (epigastric pain)  The most common way to remove the gallbladder is by using a medical instrument called a laparoscope ( laparoscopic cholecystectomy ). Open gallbladder surgery is used when laparoscopic surgery cannot be done safely. In some cases, the surgeon needs to switch to an open surgery if laparoscopic surgery cannot be successfully continued. Other reasons for removing the gallbladder by open surgery: Unexpected bleeding during the laparoscopic operation Obesity Pancreatitis (inflammation in the pancreas) Pregnancy (third trimester) Severe  liver problems Past surgeries in the same area of your belly  Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding,  blood clots Infection Risks of gallbladder surgery are: Damage to the blood vessels that go to the liver Injury to the common bile duct Injury to the small or large intestine Pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas) Before the Procedure 
 
 Your may have the following tests done before surgery: Blood tests ( complete blood count ,  electrolytes , liver and kidney tests) Chest x-ray  or electrocardiogram ( EKG ), for some patients Several x-rays of the gallbladder Ultrasound  of the gallbladder  Tell your doctor or nurse: If you are or might be pregnant Which drugs, vitamins, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription  During the week before surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that may put you at a higher risk of bleeding during surgery. Ask your doctor which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Prepare your home  for any problems you might have getting around after the surgery. You'll be told when to arrive at the hospital.  On the day of surgery: Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take the drugs your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Shower the night before or the morning of your surgery. Arrive at the hospital on time. After the Procedure 
 
 You may stay in the hospital for 3 to 5 days after open gallbladder removal. During that time: You may be asked to breathe into a device called an incentive spirometer. This helps keep your lungs working well so that you do not get pneumonia. The nurse will help you sit up in bed, hang your legs over the side, and then stand up and start to walk. At first, you will receive fluids into your vein through an intravenous (IV) tube. Soon after, you will be asked to start drinking liquids and eating foods. You will be able to shower while you are still in the hospital. You may be asked to wear pressure stockings on your legs to help prevent a blood clot from forming. These stockings also help keep your blood circulating well.  If there were problems during your surgery, or if you have bleeding, a lot of pain, or a fever, you may need to stay in the hospital longer. Your doctor or nurses will tell you  how to care for yourself  after you leave the hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people recover quickly and have good results from this procedure. Alternative Names 
 
 Cholecystectomy - open; Surgery - gallbladder - open Images 
 
 
 Cholecystitis, CT scan 
 Cholecystitis, cholangiogram 
 Cholecystolithiasis 
 Gallbladder 
 Gallbladder removal - Series 
 References 
 
 Glasgow RE, Mulvihill SJ. Treatment of gallstone disease: In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 66. Jackson PG, Evans SRT. Biliary system. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 55. Read More 
 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic 
 Gallstones 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bland diet 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 7/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Gallstones 
 Browse the Encyclopedia