
 Gallium scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A gallium scan is a test to look for swelling (inflammation), infection, or cancer in the body. It uses a radioactive material called gallium and is a type of  nuclear medicine  exam. A related test is  gallium scan of the lung .  How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will get gallium injected into your vein. Gallium is a radioactive material. The gallium travels through the bloodstream and collects in the bones and certain organs. Your health care provider will tell you to return at a later time to be scanned. The scan will take place 6 to 48 hours after the gallium is injected. The test time depends on what condition your doctor is looking for. In some cases, people are scanned more than once.  You will lie on your back on the scanner table. A special camera detects where the gallium has gathered in the body. You must lie still during the scan, which takes 30 to 60 minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Stool in the bowel can interfere with the test. You may need to take a laxative the night before you have the test. Or, you may get an enema 1 to 2 hours before the test. You may eat and drink liquids normally.  You will need to sign a consent form. You will need to take off all jewelry and metal objects before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel a sharp prick when you get the injection. The site may be sore for a few minutes. The hardest part of the scan is holding still. The scan itself is painless. The technician can help make you comfortable before the scan begins. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to look for the cause of a fever that has lasted a few weeks without an explanation. Normal Results 
 
 Gallium normally collects in bones, the liver, spleen, the large bowel, and breast tissue. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Gallium detected outside normal areas can be a sign of: Infection Inflammation Tumors, including  Hodgkin disease  or  non-Hodgkin lymphoma The test may be done to look for lung conditions such as: Primary  pulmonary hypertension Pulmonary embolus Respiratory infections, most often  Pneumocystitis jirovecii  
  pneumonia
   Sarcoidosis Scleroderma  of the lung Tumors in the lung  Risks 
 
 There is a small risk for radiation exposure. This risk is less than that with  x-rays  or CT scans. Pregnant or nursing women and young children should avoid radiation exposure if at all possible. Considerations 
 
 Not all cancers show up on a gallium scan. Areas of inflammation, such as recent surgical scars, may show up on the scan. However, they do not necessarily indicate an infection.  Alternative Names 
 
 Liver gallium scan; Bony gallium scan Images 
 
 
 Gallium injection 
 References 
 
 Hutton BF, Segerman D, Miles KA. Radionuclide and hybrid imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM. eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 6. Palestro CJ, Brown ML, Forstrom LA, et al. Society of nuclear medicine procedure guideline for gallium scintigraphy in inflammation.  The Society of Nuclear Medicine . 2004.  snmmi.files.cms-plus.com/docs/Gallium_Scintigraphy_in_Inflammation_v3.pdf . Accessed August 4, 2016. Vinnicombe SJ, Avril N, Reznek RH. Reticuloendothelial disorders: lymphoma. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM. eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 70. Read More 
 
 CT scan 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 PET scan 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, Georgia. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Browse the Encyclopedia