
 Ganglioneuroma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ganglioneuroma is a tumor of the autonomic nervous system. Causes 
 
 Ganglioneuromas are rare tumors that most often start in autonomic nerve cells. Autonomic nerves manage body functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, bowel and bladder emptying, and digestion. The tumors are usually noncancerous ( benign ). Ganglioneuromas usually occur in people over 10 years of age. They grow slowly, and may release certain chemicals or hormones. There are no known risk factors. However, the tumors may be associated with some genetic problems, such as  neurofibromatosis type 1 . Symptoms 
 
 A ganglioneuroma usually causes no symptoms. The tumor is only discovered when a person is examined or treated for another condition. Symptoms depend on the location of the tumor and the type of chemicals it releases. If the tumor is in the chest area (mediastinum), symptoms may include: Breathing difficulty Chest pain Compression of the windpipe (trachea)  If the tumor is lower down in the abdomen in the area called the retroperitoneal space, symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Bloating  If the tumor is near the spinal cord, it may cause: Compression of the spinal cord, which leads to pain and loss of strength or feeling in the legs, arms, or both Spine deformity  These tumors may produce certain hormones, which can cause the following symptoms: Diarrhea Enlarged clitoris (women) High blood pressure Increased body hair Sweating  Exams and Tests 
 
 The best tests to identify a ganglioneuroma are: CT scan  of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis MRI scan  of the chest and abdomen Ultrasound of the abdomen or pelvis Blood and urine tests may be done to determine if the tumor is producing hormones or other chemicals. A  biopsy  or complete removal of the tumor may be needed to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves surgery to remove the tumor (if it is causing symptoms). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most ganglioneuromas are noncancerous. The expected outcome is usually good.  A ganglioneuroma may become cancerous and spread to other areas. Or, it may come back after it is removed. Possible Complications 
 
 If the tumor has been present for a long time and has pressed on the spinal cord or caused other symptoms, surgery to remove the tumor may not reverse the damage. Compression of the spinal cord may result in loss of movement (paralysis), especially if the cause is not detected promptly. Surgery to remove the tumor may also lead to complications in some cases. In rare cases, problems due to compression may occur even after the tumor is removed. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms that may be caused by this type of tumor. Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Goldblum JR, Folpe AL, Weiss SW. Benign tumors of peripheral nerve. In: Goldblum JR, Folpe AL, Weiss SW, eds.  Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 27. Haithcock BE, Zagar TM, Zhang L, Stinchcombe TE. Diseases of the pleura and mediastinum. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 73. 
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia