
 Gas - flatulence 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gas is air in the intestine that is passed through the rectum. Air that moves from the digestive tract through the mouth is called  belching . Gas is also called flatus or flatulence. Considerations 
 
 Gas is normally formed in the intestines as your body digests food.  Gas can make you feel bloated. It can cause crampy or colicky pains in your belly.  Causes 
 
 Gas can be caused by certain foods you eat. You may have gas if you: Eat foods that are hard to digest, such as fiber. Sometimes, adding more fiber into your diet can cause temporary gas. Your body may adjust and stop producing gas over time. Eat or drink something your body cannot tolerate. For example, some people have  lactose intolerance  and cannot eat or drink dairy products.  Other common causes of gas are: Antibiotics Irritable bowel syndrome Inability to absorb nutrients properly ( malabsorption ) Inability to digest nutrients properly (maldigestion) Swallowing air while eating  Home Care 
 
 The following tips may help you prevent gas: Chew your food more thoroughly. Do not eat beans or cabbage. Avoid foods high in poorly digestible carbohydrates. These are called FODMAPs and include fructose (fruit sugar). Avoid lactose. Do not drink carbonated drinks. Do not chew gum. Eat more slowly. Relax while you eat. Walk for 10 to 15 minutes after eating.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Gas and other symptoms such as stomach pain, rectal pain, heartburn, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, fever, or weight loss Oily, foul-smelling, or bloody stools What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, such as: What foods do you commonly eat? Has your diet changed recently? Have you increased the  fiber  in your diet? How fast do you eat, chew, and swallow? Would you say that your gas is mild or severe? Does your gas seem to be related to eating milk products or other specific foods? What seems to make your gas better? What medicines do you take? Do you have other symptoms, like abdominal pain, diarrhea,  early satiety  (premature fullness after meals),  bloating , or  weight loss ? Tests that may be done include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Barium enema x-ray Barium swallow x-ray Blood work such as  CBC  or  blood differential Sigmoidoscopy Upper endoscopy (EGD) Breath test  Alternative Names 
 
 Flatulence; Flatus Images 
 
 
 Intestinal gas 
 Abdominal ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Azpiroz F. Intestinal gas. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 17. McQuaid KR. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Wilkins T, Pepitone C, Alex B, Schade RR. Diagnosis and management of IBS in adults.  Am Fam Physician . 2012;86(5):419-426. PMID: 22963061  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22963061 . Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Belching 
 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gas 
 Browse the Encyclopedia