
 Gastrointestinal perforation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Perforation is a hole that develops through the wall of a body organ. This problem may occur in the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, or gallbladder. Causes 
 
 Perforation of an organ can be caused by a variety of factors. These include: Appendicitis Cancer Crohn disease Diverticulitis Gallbladder disease Peptic ulcer disease Ulcerative colitis Bowel blockage Chemotherapy agents It may also be caused by surgery in the abdomen or procedures such as colonoscopy. Symptoms 
 
 Perforation of the intestine or other organs causes the contents to leak into the abdomen. This causes a severe infection called  peritonitis . Symptoms may include: 
   Severe abdominal pain
    
   Chills
    
   Fever
    
   Nausea
    
   Vomiting
    Exams and Tests 
 
 X-rays of the chest or abdomen may show air in the abdominal cavity. This is called free air. It is a sign of a tear.  A  CT scan of the abdomen  often shows where the hole is located. The  white blood cell count  is often higher than normal. Treatment 
 
 Treatment most often involves emergency surgery to repair the hole. Sometimes, a small part of the intestine must be removed. One end of the intestine may be brought out through an opening (stoma) made in the abdominal wall. This is called a  colostomy  or  ileostomy . A drain from the abdomen or other organ may also be needed. In rare cases, people can be treated with antibiotics alone if the perforation has closed. This can be confirmed by a physical exam, blood tests, CT scan, and x-rays. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Surgery is successful most of the time. However, the outcome will depend on how severe the perforation is, and for how long it was present before treatment. The presence of other illnesses can also affect how well a person will do after treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Even with surgery, infection is the most common complication of the condition. Infections can be either inside the abdomen (abdominal abscess or peritonitis), or throughout the whole body. Body-wide infection is called  sepsis . Sepsis can be very serious and can lead to death. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Blood in your stool Changes in bowel habits Fever Nausea Severe abdominal pain Vomiting Prevention 
 
 People will often have a few days of pain before the intestinal perforation occurs. If you have pain in the abdomen, see your provider right away. Treatment is much simpler and safer when it is started before the perforation occurs. Alternative Names 
 
 Intestinal perforation; Perforation of the intestines; Gastric perforation; Esophageal perforation Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Chen DC, Barie PS, Hiatt JR. Peritonitis and intraabdominal infection. In: Vincent JL, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 105. Turnage RH, Badgwell B. Abdominal wall, umbilicus, peritoneum, mesenteries, omentum, and retroperitoneum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 45. Wyers SG, Matthews JB. Surgical peritonitis and other diseases of the peritoneum, mesentery, omentum, and diaphragm. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Browse the Encyclopedia