
 Gastroparesis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gastroparesis is a condition that reduces the ability of the stomach to empty its contents. It does not involve a blockage (obstruction). Causes 
 
 The exact cause of gastroparesis is unknown. It may be caused by a disruption of nerve signals to the stomach. The condition is a common complication of  diabetes . It can also follow some surgeries. Risk factors for gastroparesis include: Diabetes Gastrectomy  (surgery to remove part of the stomach) Systemic sclerosis Use of medicine that blocks certain nerve signals (anticholinergic medicine)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal distention Hypoglycemia  (in people with diabetes) Nausea Premature abdominal fullness after meals Weight loss  without trying Vomiting Abdominal pain  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests you may need include: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) Gastric emptying study (using isotope labeling) Upper GI series Treatment 
 
 People with diabetes should always control their blood sugar levels. Better control of blood sugar levels may improve symptoms of gastroparesis. Eating small meals and soft foods may also help relieve some symptoms. Medicines that may help include: Cholinergic drugs, which act on acetylcholine nerve receptors Erythromycin Metoclopramide, a medicine that helps empty the stomach Serotonin antagonist drugs, which act on serotonin receptors  Other treatments may include: Botulinum toxin (Botox) injected into the outlet of the stomach (pylorus) Surgical procedure that creates an opening between the stomach and small intestine to allow food to move through the digestive tract more easily (gastroenterostomy)  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many treatments seem to provide only temporary benefit. Possible Complications 
 
 Ongoing nausea and vomiting may cause: Dehydration Electrolyte  imbalances Malnutrition  People with diabetes may have serious complications from poor blood sugar control. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Changes in your diet may help control symptoms. Call your health care provider if symptoms continue or if you have new symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Gastroparesis diabeticorum; Delayed gastric emptying  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Stomach 
 References 
 
 Camilleri M, Parkman HP, Shafi MA, Abell TL, Clinical guideline: management of gastroparesis.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2013; 108:18-37. PMID: 23147521  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23147521 .  Koch KL. Gastric neuromuscular function and neuromuscular disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 Dehydration 
 Diabetes 
 Gastrectomy 
 Scleroderma 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes Complications 
 Scleroderma 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia