
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizure 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizure is 1 type of seizure that involves the entire body. It is also called grand mal seizure. The terms  seizure , convulsion, or  epilepsy  are most often associated with generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Causes 
 
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizures may occur in people of any age. They can occur once (single episode). Or, they can occur as part of a repeated, chronic illness (epilepsy). Some seizures are due to psychological problems (psychogenic). Symptoms 
 
 Many people with generalized tonic-clonic seizures have vision, taste, smell, or sensory changes, hallucinations, or  dizziness  before the seizure. This is called an aura. The seizures often result in  rigid muscles . This is followed by violent  muscle contractions  and  loss of alertness (consciousness ). Other symptoms that occur during the seizure may include: Biting the cheek or tongue Clenched teeth or jaw Loss of urine or stool control (incontinence) Stopped breathing  or  difficulty breathing Blue skin color  After the seizure, the person may have: Confusion Drowsiness  or sleepiness that lasts for 1 hour or longer (called the post-ictal state) Loss of memory (amnesia) about the seizure episode Headache Weakness of 1 side of the body for a few minutes to a few hours following seizure (called Todd paralysis)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. This will include a detailed check of the brain and nervous system. An  EEG (electroencephalogram)  will be done to check the electrical activity in the brain. People with seizures often have abnormal electrical activity seen on this test. In some cases, the test shows the area in the brain where the seizures start. The brain may appear normal after a seizure or between seizures. Blood tests may also be ordered to check for other health problems that may be causing the seizures. Head CT  or  MRI  scan may be done to find the cause and location of the problem in the brain. Treatment 
 
 Treatment  for tonic-clonic seizures includes medicines, changes in lifestyle for  adults  and  children , such as activity and diet, and sometimes surgery. Your doctor can tell you more about these options. Alternative Names 
 
 Seizure - tonic-clonic; Seizure - grand mal; Grand mal seizure; Seizure - generalized; Epilepsy - generalized seizure Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Abou-Khalil BW, Gallagher MJ, Macdonald RL. Epilepsies. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 67. Wiebe S. The epilepsies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 403. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Bleeding into the skin 
 Brain abscess 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 Dementia 
 Diabetes 
 Encephalitis 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Febrile seizures 
 Head injury - first aid 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Meningitis 
 Muscle cramps 
 Neurosyphilis 
 Partial (focal) seizure 
 Phenylketonuria 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Seizures 
 Stroke 
 Transient ischemic attack 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Seizures 
 Browse the Encyclopedia