
 Genital sores - male 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A male genital sore is any sore or lesion that appears on the penis, scrotum, or male urethra. Causes 
 
 A common cause of male genital sores are infections that are spread through sexual contact, such as: Genital herpes (small, painful  blisters  filled with clear or straw-colored fluid) Genital warts (flesh-colored spots that are raised or flat, and may look like the top of a cauliflower) Chancroid (a small bump in the genitals, which becomes an  ulcer  within a day of its appearance) Syphilis (small, painless open sore or  ulcer  [called a chancre] on the genitals) Granuloma inguinale (small, beefy-red bumps appear on the genitals or around the anus) Lymphogranuloma venereum (small painless sore on the male genitals)  Other types of male genital sores may be caused by rashes such as psoriasis, molluscum contagiosum, allergic reactions, and non-sexually transmitted infections. For some of these problems, a sore may also be found other places on the body, such as in the mouth and throat. Home Care 
 
 DO NOT: Try to treat yourself before seeing a health care provider. Self-care may hide the symptoms and make it harder to find the cause of the problem. Have sexual contact until you have had a medical exam. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have any unexplained genital sores New sores appear in other parts of your body What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. The exam will include the genitals, pelvis, skin, lymph nodes, mouth, and throat. The provider will ask questions such as: What does the sore look like and where is it located? Does the sore itch or hurt? When did you first notice the sore? Have you ever had similar sores in the past? What are your sexual habits? Do you have any other symptoms such as drainage from the penis, painful urination, or signs of infection?  Different tests may be done depending on the possible cause. These may include blood tests, cultures, or biopsies. Treatment will depend on the cause. Your provider may ask you to avoid sexual activity or use a condom for a while.  Alternative Names 
 
 Sores - male genitals; Ulcers - male genitals References 
 
 Link RE. Cutaneous diseases of the external genitalia. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 15. Workowski KA, Bolan GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Chancroid 
 Donovanosis (granuloma inguinale) 
 Genital warts 
 Itching 
 Molluscum contagiosum 
 Urination - painful 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia