
 Genital warts 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Genital warts are soft growths on the skin and mucus membranes of the genitals. They may be found on the  penis ,  vulva , urethra,  vagina ,  cervix , and around and in the anus. Genital warts are spread through sexual contact. Causes 
 
 The virus that causes genital warts is called human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV infection is the most common sexually transmitted infection (STI).There are more than 180 types of HPV. Many cause no problems. Some cause warts on other parts of the body and not the genitals. Types 6 and 11 are most commonly linked to genital warts. Certain other types of HPV can lead to  precancerous changes in the cervix , or to  cervical cancer . These are called high-risk types of HPV. They can also lead to  vaginal  or  vulvar  cancer, anal cancer, and  throat  or  mouth  cancer. Important facts about HPV: HPV infection spreads from one person to another through sexual contact involving the anus, mouth, or vagina. The virus can be spread, even if you DO NOT see the warts. You may not see warts for 6 weeks to 6 months after becoming infected. You may not notice them for years. Not everyone who has come into contact with the HPV virus and genital warts will develop them.  You are more likely to get genital warts and spread them more quickly if you: Have multiple sexual partners Are sexually active at an early age Use tobacco or alcohol Have a viral infection, such as herpes, and are stressed at the same time Are pregnant Have a weakened immune system due to a condition such as diabetes, pregnancy, HIV/AIDS, or from medicines  If a child has genital warts, sexual abuse should be suspected as a possible cause. Symptoms 
 
 Genital warts can be so tiny, you cannot see them. The warts can look like: Flesh-colored spots that are raised or flat Growths that look like the top of a cauliflower  In females, genital warts can be found: Inside the vagina or anus Outside the vagina or anus, or on nearby skin On the cervix inside the body  In males, genital warts can be found on the: Penis Scrotum Groin area Thighs Inside or around the anus  Genital warts can also occur on the Lips Mouth Tongue Throat  Other symptoms are rare, but can include: Increased dampness in the genital area near the warts Increased vaginal discharge Genital itching Vaginal bleeding  during or after sex  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. In women, this includes a pelvic exam. An office procedure called  colposcopy  is used to spot warts that cannot be seen with the naked eye. It uses a light and a low-power microscope to help your provider find and then take samples ( biopsy ) of abnormal areas in your cervix. The virus that causes genital warts can cause abnormal results on a  Pap smear . If you have these types of changes, you may need more frequent Pap smears or a colposcopy. An HPV DNA test can tell if you have a high-risk type of HPV known to cause cervical cancer. This test may be done: If you have genital warts As a screening test for women over age 30 In women of any age who have a slightly abnormal Pap test result Make sure you are screened for cervical, vaginal, vulvar, or anal cancer if you have been diagnosed with genital warts. Treatment 
 
 Genital warts must be treated by a doctor. DO NOT use over-the-counter medicines meant for other kinds of warts. Treatment may include: Medicines applied to the genital warts or injected by your doctor Prescription medicine that you apply at home several times a week The warts may also be removed with minor procedures, including: Freezing ( cryosurgery ) Burning ( electrocauterization ) Laser therapy Surgery If you have genital warts, all of your sexual partners should be examined by a provider and treated if warts are found. Even if you DO NOT have symptoms, you should be treated. This is to prevent complications and avoid spreading the condition to others. You will need to return to your provider after treatment to make sure all the warts are gone. Regular Pap smears are recommended if you are a woman who has had genital warts, or if your partner had them. If you had warts on your cervix, you may need to have Pap smears every 3 to 6 months after the first treatment. Women with  precancerous changes  caused by HPV infection may need further treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many sexually active young women become infected with HPV. In many cases, HPV goes away on its own. Most men who become infected with HPV never develop any symptoms or problems from the infection. They can still pass it on to current and sometimes future sexual partners. Even after you have been treated for genital warts, you may still infect others. Possible Complications 
 
 Some types of HPV can cause cancer of the cervix and vulva. They are the main cause of cervical cancer. Genital warts may become numerous and quite large. These will need further treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: A current or past sexual partner has genital warts You have visible warts on your external genitals, itching, discharge, or abnormal vaginal bleeding. Keep in mind that genital warts may not appear for months to years after having sexual contact with an infected person. You think a young child might have genital warts  Women should begin having Pap smears at age 21. Prevention 
 
 HPV can be passed from person to person even when there are no visible warts or other symptoms.  Practicing safer sex  can help reduce your risk of getting HPV and cervical cancer: Always use male and female condoms. But be aware that condoms cannot fully protect you. This is because the virus or warts can also be on the nearby skin. Have only one sexual partner, who you know is infection-free. Limit the number of sexual partners you have over time. Avoid partners who take part in high-risk sexual activities. An  HPV vaccine  is available: It protects against the HPV types that cause most HPV cancers in women and men. The vaccines DO NOT treat genital warts, they prevent the infection. The vaccine can be given to boys and girls 9 to 12 years old. If the vaccine is given at this age, it is a series of 2 shots. If the vaccine is given at 15 years or older, it is a series of 3 shots. Ask your provider whether the HPV vaccine is right for you or child. Alternative Names 
 
 Condylomata acuminata; Penile warts; Human papillomavirus (HPV); Venereal warts; Condyloma; HPV DNA test; Sexually transmitted disease (STD) - warts; Sexually transmitted infection (STI) - warts; LSIL-HPV; Low-grade dysplasia-HPV; HSIL-HPV; High-grade dysplasia HPV; HPV; Cervical cancer - genital warts Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Berman B, Amini S. Condyloma acuminata. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 46.  Bonnez W. Papillomaviruses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 146.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015 sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines: anogenital warts. Updated June 4, 2015. Centers for Disease Control Web site.  www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/warts.htm . Accessed December 2, 2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Press Release: CDC recommends only two HPV shots for younger adolescents. Updated October 20, 2016. Centers for Disease Control Web site.  www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/p1020-hpv-shots.html . Accessed December 2, 2016.
 Committee on Adolescent Health Care of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; Immunization Expert Work Group of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee opinion No. 588: human papillomavirus vaccination.  Obstet Gynecol . 2014;123(3):712-718. PMID: 24553168  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24553168 . Read More 
 
 Cervical cancer 
 Cervical dysplasia 
 Cervix 
 Penis 
 Vagina 
 Vulva 
 Warts 
 
 Review Date 8/7/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda Center for Fertility, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genital Warts 
 HPV 
 Browse the Encyclopedia