
 Glomerulonephritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Glomerulonephritis is a type of kidney disease in which the part of your kidneys that helps filter waste and fluids from the blood is damaged. Causes 
 
 Glomerulonephritis may be caused by problems with the body's immune system. Often, the exact cause of this condition is unknown. Damage to the glomeruli causes blood and protein to be lost in the urine. The condition may develop quickly, and kidney function is lost within weeks or months. This is called rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. A quarter of people with chronic glomerulonephritis have no history of kidney disease. The following may increase your risk for this condition: Blood or lymphatic system disorders Exposure to hydrocarbon solvents History of cancer Infections such as  strep infections , viruses, heart infections, or  abscesses Many conditions cause or increase the risk for glomerulonephritis, including: Amyloidosis Antiglomerular basement membrane antibody disease Blood vessel diseases, such as vasculitis or  polyarteritis Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis Goodpasture syndrome Heavy use of pain relievers, especially NSAIDs Henoch-Schönlein purpura IgA nephropathy Lupus nephritis Membranoproliferative GN Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of glomerulonephritis are: Blood in the urine  (dark, rust-colored, or brown urine) Foamy urine (due to excess protein in the urine) Swelling (edema) of the face, eyes, ankles, feet, legs, or abdomen Symptoms may also include the following: Abdominal pain Blood in the vomit  or stools Cough and shortness of breath Diarrhea Excessive urination Fever General ill feeling , fatigue, and loss of appetite Joint or muscle aches Nosebleed The symptoms of chronic kidney disease may develop over time. Chronic renal failure  symptoms may gradually develop. Exams and Tests 
 
 Because symptoms may develop slowly, the disorder may be discovered when you have an abnormal  urinalysis  during a routine physical or examination for another condition. Signs of glomerulonephritis can include: Anemia High blood pressure Signs of reduced kidney function A  kidney biopsy  confirms the diagnosis. Later, signs of chronic kidney disease may be seen, including: Nerve inflammation (polyneuropathy) Signs of fluid overload, including abnormal heart and lung sounds Swelling ( edema ) Imaging tests that may be done include: Abdominal CT scan Kidney ultrasound Chest x-ray Intravenous pyelogram ( IVP ) Urinalysis and other urine tests include: Creatinine clearance Examination of the urine under a microscope Urine for  total protein Uric acid in the urine Urine concentration test Urine creatinine Urine protein Urine RBC Urine specific gravity Urine osmolality This disease may also cause abnormal results on the following blood tests: Albumin Antiglomerular basement membrane  antibody test Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) Antinuclear antibodies BUN  and  creatinine Complement  levels Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder, and the type and severity of symptoms. Controlling high blood pressure is usually the most important part of treatment. Medicines that may be prescribed include: Blood pressure drugs, most often angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers Corticosteroids Drugs that suppress the immune system A procedure called plasmapheresis may sometimes be used for glomerulonephritis caused by immune problems. The fluid part of the blood that contains  antibodies  is removed and replaced with intravenous fluids or donated plasma (that does not contain antibodies). Removing antibodies may reduce inflammation in the kidney tissues. You may need to limit salt, fluids,  protein , and other substances. People with this condition should be closely watched for signs of kidney failure.  Dialysis  or a  kidney transplant  may eventually be needed. Support Groups 
 
 You can often ease the stress of illness by joining  support groups  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Glomerulonephritis may be temporary and reversible, or it may get worse. Progressive glomerulonephritis may lead to: Chronic kidney failure Reduced kidney function End-stage kidney disease If you have nephrotic syndrome and it can be controlled, you may also be able to control other symptoms. If it cannot be controlled, you may develop end-stage kidney disease. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have a condition that increases your risk for glomerulonephritis You develop symptoms of glomerulonephritis Prevention 
 
 Most cases of glomerulonephritis can't be prevented. Some cases may be prevented by avoiding or limiting exposure to organic solvents,  mercury , and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Alternative Names 
 
 Glomerulonephritis - chronic; Chronic nephritis; Glomerular disease; Necrotizing glomerulonephritis; Glomerulonephritis - crescentic; Crescentic glomerulonephritis; Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Appel GB, Radhakrishnan JAI, D'Agati VD. Secondary glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 32. Cattran DC, Reigh HN. Overview of therapy for glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 33. Nachman PH, Hennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
 Goodpasture syndrome 
 Heart failure - overview 
 High blood pressure 
 IgA nephropathy 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Malignant hypertension 
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Urinalysis 
 Urinary tract infection - children 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia