
 Glomerular filtration rate 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is a test used to check how well the kidneys are working. Specifically, it estimates how much blood passes through the glomeruli each minute. Glomeruli are the tiny filters in the kidneys that filter waste from the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed.
 The blood sample is sent to a lab. There, the creatinine level in the blood sample is tested. The lab specialist combines your creatinine level with several other factors to estimate your GFR. Different formulas are used for adults and children. The formula includes some or all of the following: Age Blood creatinine measurement Ethnicity Gender Height Weight The  creatinine clearance test , which involves a 24-hour urine collection, can also provide an estimate of kidney function. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider may ask you to temporarily stop any medicines that may affect the test results. These include antibiotics and stomach acid medicines. Be sure to tell your provider about all the medicines you take. Do not stop taking any medicine before talking to your doctor. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or think you might be. GFR is affected by pregnancy. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there might be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 
The GFR test measures how well your kidneys are filtering the blood. Your doctor may order this test if there are signs that your kidneys are not working well. It may also be done to see how far kidney disease has progressed. The GFR test is recommended for people with chronic kidney disease. It is also recommended for persons who may get kidney disease due to: Diabetes Family history of kidney disease Frequent  urinary tract infections Heart disease High blood pressure Urinary blockage Normal Results 
 
 According to the National Kidney Foundation, normal results range from 90 to 120 mL/min/1.73 m 2 . Older people will have lower than normal GFR levels, because GFR decreases with age. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Levels below 60 mL/min/1.73 m 2  for 3 or more months are a sign of chronic kidney disease. A GFR lower than 15 mL/min/1.73 m 2  is a sign of kidney failure and requires immediate medical attention. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but can include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 GFR; Estimated GFR; eGFR References 
 
 

Inker LA, Fan L, Levey AS. Assessment of renal function. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 3. Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. McPherson RA, Ben-Ezra J. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.  22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 28. 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Failure 
 Kidney Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia