
 Goiter - simple 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A simple goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland. It is usually not a tumor or cancer. Causes 
 
 The thyroid gland is an important organ of the  endocrine system . It is located at the front of the neck just above where your collarbones meet. The gland makes the hormones that control the way every cell in the body uses energy. This process is called  metabolism . Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of goiter. The body needs iodine to produce thyroid hormone. If you do not have enough iodine in your diet, the thyroid gets larger to try and capture all the iodine it can, so it can make the right amount of thyroid hormone. So, a goiter can be a sign the thyroid is not able to make enough thyroid hormone. The use of iodized salt in the United States prevents a lack of iodine in the diet. Other causes of goiter include: The body's immune system attacking the thyroid gland ( autoimmune problem ) Certain medicines (lithium, amiodarone) Infections Cigarette smoking Certain foods (soy, peanuts, vegetables in the broccoli and cabbage family) Toxic nodular goiter, an enlarged thyroid gland that has a small, rounded growth or many growths called nodules, which produce too much thyroid hormone  Simple goiters are more common in: People over age 40 People with a family history of goiter Women  Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is an enlarged thyroid gland. The size may range from a single small  nodule  to a large mass at the front of the neck. Some people with a simple goiter may have symptoms of an  underactive thyroid  gland. In rare cases, an enlarged thyroid can put pressure on the windpipe (trachea) and food tube (esophagus). This can lead to: Breathing difficulties  (with very large goiters), especially when lying flat on the back Cough Hoarseness Swallowing difficulties, especially with solid food Pain in the area of the thyroid  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. This involves feeling your neck as you swallow. Swelling in the area of the thyroid may be felt. If you have a very large goiter, you may have pressure on your neck veins. As a result, when the provider asks you to raise your arms above your head, you may feel dizzy. Blood tests may be ordered to measure thyroid function: Free thyroxine ( T4 ) Thyroid stimulating hormone ( TSH )  Tests to look for abnormal and possibly cancerous areas in the thyroid gland include: Thyroid scan  and uptake Ultrasound of the thyroid If nodules are found on an ultrasound, a biopsy may be needed to check for thyroid cancer. Treatment 
 
 A goiter only needs to be treated if it is causing symptoms. Treatments for an enlarged thyroid include: Thyroid hormone replacement pills if the goiter is due to an underactive thyroid Small doses of Lugol's iodine or potassium iodine solution if the goiter is due to a lack of iodine Radioactive iodine to shrink the gland, especially if the thyroid is producing too much thyroid hormone Surgery ( thyroidectomy ) to remove all or part of the gland  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A simple goiter may disappear on its own, or may become larger. Over time, the thyroid gland may stop making enough thyroid hormone. This condition is called  hypothyroidism . In some cases, a goiter becomes  toxic  and produces thyroid hormone on its own. This can cause high levels of thyroid hormone, a condition called  hyperthyroidism . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you experience any swelling in the front of your neck or any other symptoms of goiter. Prevention 
 
 Using iodized table salt prevents most simple goiters. Alternative Names 
 
 Simple goiter; Endemic goiter; Colloidal goiter; Nontoxic goiter Images 
 
 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Hegedüs L, Paschke R, Krohn K, Bonnema SJ. Multinodular goiter. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 90. Kim M, Ladenson PW. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 226. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Malignancy 
 Toxic nodular goiter 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Thyroid gland removal - discharge 
 Review Date 4/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia