
 Gram stain of urethral discharge 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A Gram stain of urethral discharge is a test used to identify bacteria in fluid from the tube that drains urine from the bladder (urethra). How the Test is Performed 
 
 Fluid from the urethra is collected on a cotton swab. A sample from this swab is applied in a very thin layer to a microscope slide. A series of stains called a Gram stain is applied to the specimen. The stained smear is then examined under the microscope for the presence of bacteria. The color, size, and shape of the cells help identify the type of bacteria causing the infection. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 This test is often performed in the health care provider's office. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel pressure or burning when the cotton swab touches the urethra. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed when an abnormal urethral discharge is present. It may be performed if a sexually transmitted disease is suspected. Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may indicate  gonorrhea  or other infections. Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 A culture of the specimen ( urethral discharge culture ) should be performed in addition to the gram stain. More sophisticated diagnostic tests (such as PCR tests) are sometimes also done. Alternative Names 
 
 Urethral discharge Gram stain Images 
 
 
 Gram stain of urethral discharge 
 References 
 
 Augenbraum MH, McCormack WM. Urethritis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 109. Cohen MS. Approach to the patient with a sexually transmitted disease. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 293. 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gonorrhea 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia