
 Granuloma annulare 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Granuloma annulare (GA) is a long-term ( chronic ) skin disease consisting of a rash with reddish bumps arranged in a circle or ring. Causes 
 
 GA most often affects children and young adults. It is slightly more common in females. The condition is usually seen in otherwise healthy people. Sometimes, it may be associated with  diabetes  or thyroid disease. The exact cause of GA is unknown. Symptoms 
 
 GA usually causes no other symptoms, but the rash may be slightly itchy. People usually notice a ring of small, firm bumps (papules) over the backs of the forearms, hands, or feet. Occasionally, they may find a number of rings. In rare cases, GA appears as a firm nodule under the skin of the arms or legs. In some cases, the rash spreads all over the body. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may think you have a fungal infection when looking at your skin as the ring shape may look like  ringworm . A skin scraping and  KOH test  can be used to tell the difference between GA and a fungal infection. You may also need a  skin punch biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis of GA. Treatment 
 
 GA can resolve on its own. You may not need treatment for GA, except for cosmetic reasons. Very strong steroid creams or ointments are sometimes used to clear up the rash more quickly. Injections of steroids directly into the rings may also be effective. Some providers may choose to freeze the bumps with liquid nitrogen. People with severe or widespread cases may need ultraviolet light therapy or medicines that suppress the immune system. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most GA disappears without treatment within 2 years. But, the rings can remain for many years. The appearance of new rings years later is not uncommon. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice a ring anywhere on your skin that does not go away within a few weeks. Alternative Names 
 
 Pseudorheumatoid nodule - subcutaneous granuloma annulare; GA Images 
 
 
 Granuloma annulare - close-up 
 Granuloma annulare on the eyelid 
 Granuloma annulare on the elbow 
 Granuloma annulare on the legs 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Cutaneous manifestations of internal disease. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 26. Patterson JW. The granulomatous reaction pattern. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2016:chap 7. Recica HF, Iichyshyn A. Granuloma annulare. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Jones-Berth J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 91. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 
 Review Date 4/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia