
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a rare disorder in which blood vessels become inflamed. This leads to damage in major organs of the body. It was formerly known as Wegener's granulomatosis. Causes 
 
 GPA mainly affects blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, ears, lungs, and kidneys. Other areas may also be affected in some cases. The disease can be severe and prompt treatment is important.  The exact cause is unknown, but it is an  autoimmune disorder . GPA is most common in middle-aged adults of northern European descent. It is rare in children, but has been seen in infants as young as 3 months old. Symptoms 
 
 Frequent sinusitis is the most common symptom. Other early symptoms include a fever that has no clear cause, night sweats,  fatigue , and a general ill feeling ( malaise ). Other common symptoms may include: Chronic ear infections  Respiratory such as nose bleeds, pain, and sores around the opening of the nose  Cough with or without blood in the sputum . Chest pain and shortness of breath as the disease progresses Loss of appetite and weight loss Skin changes such as bruises and ulcers of the skin Kidney problems Bloody urine Eye problems ranging from mild  conjunctivitis  to severe swelling of the eye. Less common symptoms include: Joint pain Weakness Abdominal pain Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have a blood test that looks for proteins called antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). These are often found in people with active GPA. However, this test is sometimes comes back negative even in people with the condition. A chest x-ray will be done to look for signs of lung disease. Urinalysis  is done to look for signs of kidney disease such as protein and blood in the urine. Sometimes urine is collected over 24 hours to check how the kidneys are working. A  biopsy  is sometimes needed to confirm the diagnosis. The exact type of biopsy depends on which area of the body the doctor wants to look at. You may have one of the following: Bronchoscopy with biopsy of the lung Kidney biopsy Nasal mucosal biopsy Open lung biopsy Skin biopsy Upper airway biopsy Other tests that may be done include: Sinus CT scan Chest CT scan  Treatment 
 
 You may be treated glucocorticoids (such as prednisone). These are given along with other medicines that slow down the immune response. Medicines used with prednisone to treat GPA include: Rituximab (Rituxan) Azathioprine (Imuran) Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) Methotrexate  These medicines are effective in severe disease but they may cause serious side effects. Talk to your health care provider about your treatment plan.  Other medicines used for the condition include: Medicines to prevent bone loss caused by prednisone Folic acid or folinic acid, if you are taking methotrexate Antibiotics to prevent lung infections  Support Groups 
 
 Support groups with others who suffer from similar diseases may help people with the condition and their families learn about the diseases and adjust to the changes associated with the treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, people with severe forms of this disease can die within a few months. With treatment, the outlook for most patients is good. Most people who receive corticosteroids and other medicines that slow the immune response get much better.  The disease may return about half the time. It often comes back within 2 years of stopping treatment, so ongoing follow-up is needed.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications most often occur when the disease is not treated. People with GPA develop tissue damage in the lungs, airways, and the kidneys. Kidney involvement may result in blood in the urine and  kidney failure . Kidney disease can quickly get worse. Kidney function may not improve even when the condition is controlled by medicines. If untreated, kidney failure and possibly death occur in most cases.  Other complications may include: Eye swelling Lung failure Coughing up blood Nasal septum perforation (hole inside the nose) Side effects from medicines used to treat the disease  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You develop chest pain. You cough up blood. You have blood in your urine. You have other symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Formerly: Wegener's granulomatosis Images 
 
 
 Adenocarcinoma - chest x-ray 
 Wegener's granulomatosis on the leg 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Falk RJ, Gross WL, Guillevin L, et al. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's): an alternative name for Wegener's granulomatosis.  Ann Rheum Dis . 2011;70(4):704. PMID: 21372195  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21372195 .  Savage COS, Harper L. Antineutrophil Cytoplasm Antibody Associated Vasculitis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 89.  Stone JH. The systemic vasculitides. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 270. Stone JH, Merkel PA, Spiera R, et al. Rituximab versus cyclophosphamide for ANCA-associated vasculitis.  N Engl J Med . 2010;363(3):221. PMID: 20647199  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20647199 .  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia