
 Graves disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Graves disease is an autoimmune disorder that leads to an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism). An  autoimmune disorder  is a condition that occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. Causes 
 
 The thyroid gland is an important organ of the  endocrine  system. The gland is located at the front of the neck above where the collarbones meet. This gland releases the hormones  thyroxine  (T4) and  triiodothyronine  (T3), which control body  metabolism . Controlling metabolism is important for regulating mood, weight, and mental and physical energy levels. When the body makes too much thyroid hormone, the condition is called  hyperthyroidism . (An underactive thyroid leads to  hypothyroidism .) Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. It is due to an abnormal immune system response that causes the thyroid gland to produce too much thyroid hormone. Graves disease is most common in women over age 20. But the disorder can occur at any age and can affect men as well. Symptoms 
 
 Younger people may have these symptoms: Anxiety or nervousness, as well as problems sleeping Breast enlargement in men (possible) Problems concentrating Fatigue Frequent bowel movements Hair loss Heat intolerance  and increased sweating Increased appetite , despite having weight loss Irregular menstrual periods in women Muscle weakness of the hips and shoulders Moodiness, including irritability and anger Rapid or irregular heartbeat Shortness of breath with activity Tremor Many people with Graves disease have problems with their eyes: The eyeballs may seem to be bulging out and may be painful. Eyes can feel irritated and be tearing. Double vision may be present. Older people may have these symptoms: Rapid or  irregular heartbeat Chest pain Memory loss Weakness and fatigue  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and may find that you have an increased heart rate. An exam of your neck may find that your thyroid gland is enlarged (goiter). Other tests include: Blood tests to measure levels of TSH, T3, and free T4 Radioactive iodine uptake  and scan  This disease may also affect the following test results: Orbit CT scan  or ultrasound Thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin ( TSI ) Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody Anti-TSH receptor antibody  Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at controlling your overactive thyroid. Medicines called beta-blockers are often used to treat symptoms of rapid heart rate, sweating, and anxiety until the hyperthyroidism is controlled. Hyperthyroidism is treated with 1 or more of the following: Antithyroid drugs can block or change how the thyroid gland uses iodine. These drugs may be used to control the overactive thyroid gland before surgery or radioiodine therapy or as a long-term treatment. Radioiodine therapy in which radioactive iodine is given by mouth. It then concentrates in the overactive thyroid tissue and causes damage. Surgery may be done to remove the thyroid. If you have had radioactive iodine treatment or surgery, you will need to take replacement thyroid hormones for the rest of your life. This is because these treatments destroy or remove the gland. TREATMENT OF THE EYES Some of the eye problems related to Graves disease often improve after treatment with medicines, radiation, or surgery. Radioiodine therapy can sometimes make eye problems worse. Eye problems are worse in people who smoke, even after the hyperthyroidism is treated. Sometimes, prednisone (a steroid medication that suppresses the immune system) is needed to reduce eye irritation and swelling. You may need to tape your eyes closed at night to prevent drying. Sunglasses and eye drops may reduce eye irritation. In rare cases, surgery or radiation therapy (different from radioactive iodine) may be needed to prevent further damage to the eye and loss of vision. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Graves disease often responds well to treatment. Thyroid surgery or radioactive iodine often will cause an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). Without getting the correct dosage of thyroid hormone replacement, hypothyroidism can lead to: Depression Mental and physical sluggishness Weight gain  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of Graves disease. Also call if your eye problems or other symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of hyperthyroidism with:  Decrease in consciousness Fever Rapid, irregular heartbeat  Alternative Names 
 
 Diffuse thyrotoxic goiter; Hyperthyroidism - Graves; Thyrotoxicosis - Graves; Exophthalmos - Graves; Ophthalmopathy - Graves; Exophthalmia - Graves; Exorbitism - Graves Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 Graves disease 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Burch HB, Cooper DS. Management of Graves disease: a review.  JAMA . 2015;314(23):2544-2554. PMID: 26670972  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26670972 . Davies TF, Lauerberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Marino M, Vitti P, Chiovato L. Graves' disease. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 82. Read More 
 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Endocrine glands 
 Eyes - bulging 
 Free T4 test 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Metabolism 
 Pulse - bounding 
 T3 test 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia