
 Groin lump 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A groin lump is swelling in the groin area. This is where the upper leg meets the lower abdomen. Considerations 
 
 A groin lump may be firm or soft, tender, or not painful at all. Your health care provider should examine any groin lumps. Causes 
 
 The most common cause of a groin lump is swollen lymph nodes. These may be caused by: Cancer, most often lymphoma (cancer of the lymph system) Infection in the legs Bodywide infections often caused by viruses Infections spread through sexual contact such as genital herpes, chlamydia, or gonorrhea Other causes include any of the following: Allergic reaction Drug reaction Harmless (benign) cyst Hernia  (a soft, large bulge in the groin on one or both sides) Injury to the groin area Lipomas (harmless fatty growths) Home Care 
 
 Follow the treatment your provider prescribed. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment to see your provider if you have an unexplained groin lump. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and may feel the lymph nodes in your groin area. A genital or pelvic exam may be done. You will be asked about your medical history and symptoms, such as when you first noticed the lump, whether it came on suddenly or slowly, or whether it gets larger when you cough or strain. You may also be asked about your sexual activities. Tests that may be done include: Blood tests such as a  CBC  or  blood differential Blood tests to check for syphilis, HIV, or other sexually transmitted infections Kidney function tests Liver function tests Liver spleen scan Lymph node biopsy Alternative Names 
 
 Lump in the groin; Inguinal lymphadenopathy; Localized lymphadenopathy - groin; Bubo; Lymphadenopathy - groin Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Swollen lymph nodes in the groin 
 References 
 
 Armitage JO, Bierman PJ. Approach to the patient with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 168. Malangoni MA, Rosen MJ. Hernias. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery: The Biological Basis of Modern Surgical Practice . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 44. Raftery AT, Lim E, Ostor AJK. Groin swellings. In: Raftery AT, Lim E, Ostor AJK, eds.  Churchill's Pocketbook of Differential Diagnosis . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:181-187. 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia