
 Gum biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A gum  biopsy  is a surgery in which a small piece of gingival (gum) tissue is removed and examined.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A painkiller is sprayed into the mouth in the area of the abnormal gum tissue. You may also have an injection of numbing medicine. A small piece of gum tissue is removed and checked for problems in the lab. Sometimes stitches are used to close the opening created for the biopsy. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be told not to eat for a few hours before the biopsy. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The painkiller put in your mouth should numb the area during the procedure. You may feel some tugging or pressure. If there is bleeding, the blood vessels may be sealed off with an electric current or laser. This is called  electrocauterization . After the numbness wears off, the area may be sore for a few days. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to look for the cause of abnormal gum tissue. Normal Results 
 
 This test is only done when gum tissue looks abnormal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may indicate: Amyloid Noncancerous  mouth sores  (the specific cause can be determined in many cases) Oral cancer  (for example,  squamous cell carcinoma ) Risks 
 
 Risks for this procedure include: Bleeding from the biopsy site Infection of the gums Soreness  Considerations 
 
 Avoid brushing the area where the biopsy was performed for 1 week.  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - gingiva (gums) Images 
 
 
 Gum biopsy 
 Tooth anatomy 
 References 
 
 Eusterman VD. History and Physical Examination, Screening and Diagnostic Testing.  Otolaryngol Clin North Am . Feb 2011;44(1):1-29. PMID: 21093621  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21093621 .  Read More 
 
 Mouth sores 
 Oral cancer 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Squamous cell skin cancer 
 
 Review Date 2/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Alan Lipkin, MD, Otolaryngologist, private practice, Denver, CO. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Gum Disease 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Oral Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia