
 H1N1 influenza (Swine flu) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The H1N1 virus (swine flu) is an infection of the nose, throat, and lungs. It is caused by the H1N1 influenza virus. Causes 
 
 Earlier forms of the H1N1 virus were found in pigs (swine). Over time, the virus changed (mutated) and infected humans. H1N1 is a new virus first detected in humans in 2009. It spread quickly around the world. The H1N1 virus is one of the three viruses included in the regular (seasonal) flu vaccine. You cannot get H1N1 flu virus from eating pork or any other food, drinking water, swimming in pools, or using hot tubs or saunas. Any flu virus can spread from person to person when: Someone with the flu coughs or sneezes into air that others breathe in. Someone touches a doorknob, desk, computer, or counter with the flu virus on it and then touches their mouth, eyes, or nose. Someone touches mucus while taking care of a child or adult who is ill with the flu.  Alternative Names 
 
 Swine flu; H1N1 type A influenza References 
 
 Strikas RA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP); ACIP Child/Adolescent Immunization Work Group. Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization schedules for persons aged 0 through 18 years--United States, 2015.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2015;64:93-94. PMID: 25654610  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25654610 . Treanor JJ. Influenza (including avian influenza and swine influenza). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 167. Read More 
 
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
 Cough 
 Fever 
 Flu 
 Immune response 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Stuffy or runny nose - children 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 When your baby or infant has a fever 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 H1N1 Flu (Swine Flu) 
 Browse the Encyclopedia