
 Hair spray poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hair spray poisoning occurs when someone breathes in (inhales) hair spray or sprays it down their throat or into their eyes. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The harmful ingredients in hair spray are: Carboxymethylcellulose Denatured alcohol Hydrofluorocarbon Polyvinyl alcohol Propylene glycol Polyvinylpyrrolidone Where Found 
 
 Various hair sprays contain these ingredients. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of hair spray poisoning include: Blurred vision Breathing difficulty Burning pain in the throat Burns to the eye Coma  (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness, if very large amounts are inhaled) Low blood pressure Rash Stupor  (decreased level of consciousness and confusion, if very large amounts are inhaled or swallowed)  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away Move the person to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was inhaled Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.  The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicines to treat an allergic reaction and other symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin (if needed) Washing of the skin or eyes (irrigation) If the poisoning is severe, the person may be admitted to the hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hair spray is not very toxic. Most hair spray poisonings are not serious. How well someone does depends on how severe the poisoning is and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. References 
 
 Caraccio TR, McFee RB. Cosmetics and toilet articles. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 100. Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 158. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia