
 Hairy cell leukemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an unusual cancer of the blood. It affects B cells, a type of white blood cell (lymphocyte). Causes 
 
 HCL is caused by the abnormal growth of B cells. The cells look "hairy" under the microscope because they have fine projections extending from their surface. HCL usually leads to a low number of normal blood cells. The cause of this disease is unknown. Certain genetic changes (mutations) in the cancer cells may be the cause. It affects men more often than women. The average age of diagnosis is 55. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of HCL may include any of the following: Easy bruising or bleeding Heavy sweating (especially at night) Fatigue  and  weakness Feeling full after eating only a small amount Recurrent infections and fevers Pain or fullness in the upper left belly (enlarged spleen) Swollen lymph glands Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider may be able to feel a  swollen spleen  or liver. An  abdominal CT scan  or ultrasound may be done to evaluate this swelling. Blood tests that may be done include: Complete blood count  (CBC) to check low levels of white and red blood cells, as well as  platelets . Blood tests and a  bone marrow biopsy  to check for hairy cells. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may not be needed for the early stages of this disease. Some people may need an occasional blood transfusion. If treatment is needed because of very low blood counts, chemotherapy drugs can be used.  In most cases,  chemotherapy  can relieve the symptoms for many years. When the signs and symptoms go away, you are said to be in remission. Removing the spleen  may improve blood counts, but is unlikely to cure the disease. Antibiotics can be used to treat infections. People with low blood counts may receive growth factors and, possibly, transfusions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with HCL can expect to live 10 years or longer after diagnosis and treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 The low blood counts caused by hairy cell leukemia can lead to: Infections Fatigue Excessive bleeding When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have major bleeding. Also call if you have signs of infection, such as a persistent  fever ,  cough , or  general ill feeling . Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent this disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis; HCL; Leukemia - hairy cell Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Auer rods 
 Hairy cell leukemia - microscopic view 
 Formed elements of blood 
 Enlarged spleen 
 References 
 
 National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): hairy cell leukemia. Updated May 3, 2016. Version 3. 2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nhl.pdf . Accessed July 11, 2016. Park JH, Tallman MS. Hairy cell leukemia. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 103. Ravandi F. Hairy cell leukemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 77. 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia