
 Hand x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This test is an  x-ray  of one or both hands. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A hand x-ray is taken in a hospital radiology department or your health care provider's office by an x-ray technician. You will be asked to place your hand on the x-ray table, and keep it very still as the picture is being taken. You may need to change the position of your hand, so more images can be taken. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the provider if you are pregnant or think you may be pregnant. Remove all jewelry from your hand and wrist. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Generally, there is little or no discomfort associated with x-rays. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Hand x-ray is used to detect  fractures , tumors, foreign objects, or degenerative conditions of the hand. Hand x-rays may also be done to find out a child's "bone age." This can help determine if a health problem is preventing the child from growing properly or how much growth is left. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may include: Fractures Bone tumors Degenerative bone conditions Osteomyelitis  (inflammation of the bone caused by an infection) Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - hand Images 
 
 
 Hand x-ray 
 References 
 
 Chong AK, Tan DMK. Diagnostic imaging of the hand and wrist. In: Neligan PC, ed.  Plastic Surgery . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 3. Mailhot T, Lyn ET. Hand. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 50. Read More 
 
 Bone tumor 
 Broken bone 
 Osteomyelitis 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hand Injuries and Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia