
 Hand or foot spasms 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Spasms are contractions of the muscles of the hands, thumbs, feet, or toes. Spasms are usually brief, but they can be severe and painful. Considerations 
 
 Symptoms depend on the cause. They may include: Cramping Fatigue Muscle weakness Numbness, tingling, or a "pins and needles" feeling Twitching Uncontrolled, purposeless, rapid motions  Nighttime leg cramps are common in the older people. Causes 
 
 Cramps or spasms in the muscles often have no clear cause. Possible causes of hand or foot spasms include: 
   Abnormal levels of electrolytes, or minerals, in the body
    
   Brain disorders, such as  Parkinson disease ,  multiple sclerosis ,  dystonia , and  Huntington disease 
   Chronic kidney disease and dialysis
    
   Damage to a single nerve or nerve group ( mononeuropathy ) or multiple nerves (polyneuropathy) that are connected to muscles
    
   Dehydration (not having enough fluids in your body)
    Hyperventilation , which is rapid or deep breathing that can occur with anxiety or panic
    Muscle cramps , usually caused by overuse during sports or work activity Pregnancy, more often during the third trimester Thyroid disorders Too little vitamin D Use of certain medicines Home Care 
 
 If vitamin D deficiency is the cause, vitamin D supplements may be suggested by the health care provider. Calcium supplements may also help. Being active helps keep muscles loose. Aerobic exercise, especially swimming, and strength building exercises are helpful. But care must be taken not to overdo activity, which may worsen the spasms. Drinking plenty of fluids during exercise is also important. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you notice recurrent spasms of your hands or feet, call your provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms.  Blood and urine tests may be done. Tests may include: Potassium, calcium and magnesium levels Hormone levels Kidney function tests Vitamin D levels ( 25-OH vitamin D )  Treatment depends on the cause of the spasms. For example, if they are due to dehydration, your provider will likely suggest you drink more fluids. Alternative Names 
 
 Foot spasms; Carpopedal spasm; Spasms of the hands or feet; Hand spasms Images 
 
 
 Muscular atrophy 
 References 
 
 Goljian EF. Water, electrolyte, acid-base, and hemodynamic disorders. In: Goljian EF, ed.  Rapid Review Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 5. Smogorzewski MJ, Stubbs JR, Yu ASL. Disorders of calcium, magnesium, and phosphate balance. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 19. Swartz MH. Signs and symptoms of deficiency states. In: Swartz MH, ed.  Textbook of Physical Diagnosis: History and Examination . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:Appendix B. Read More 
 
 Alkalosis 
 Fatigue 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Muscle cramps 
 Seizures 
 Vitamin D 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, attending neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foot Injuries and Disorders 
 Hand Injuries and Disorders 
 Neuromuscular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia