
 Hand lotion poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hand lotion poisoning occurs when someone swallows hand lotion or hand cream. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 These ingredients in hand lotion or cream can be harmful if swallowed: Dimethicone Mineral oil Paraffins (waxes) Petrolatum Various alcohols Where Found 
 
 Various hand lotions and creams contain these ingredients. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of hand lotion poisoning include: Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting Possible  blockage in the intestines  that causes  stomach pain Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Give the person water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include: Vomiting Convulsions A decreased level of alertness Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Activated charcoal Breathing support Fluids through a vein (by IV) Laxatives Medicine to treat the effects of the poison Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much hand lotion they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.  These products are not very poisonous, and recovery is very likely. Alternative Names 
 
 Hand cream poisoning References 
 
 Caraccio TR, McFee RB. Cosmetics and toilet articles. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 100. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia