
 Hangover treatment 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hangover is the unpleasant symptoms a person has after drinking too much alcohol. Symptoms can include: Headache and dizziness Nausea Fatigue Sensitivity to light and sound Rapid heartbeat Depression, anxiety and irritability Tips for preventing a hangover: Drink slowly and on a full stomach. If you are a small person, the effects of  alcohol  are greater on you than on a larger person. Drink in moderation. Women should have no more than 1 drink per day and men no more than 2 drinks per day. One drink is defined as 12 ounces (360 milliliters) of beer, 5 ounces (150 milliliters) of wine, or 1 1/2 ounces (45 milliliters) of 80-proof liquor. Drink a glass of water in between drinks containing alcohol. This will help you drink less alcohol, and decrease  dehydration  from drinking alcohol. Avoid alcohol completely to prevent hangovers. If you have a hangover, consider the following for relief: Certain measures, such as fruit juice or honey, have been recommended to treat a hangover. But there is very little scientific evidence to show that such measures help. Recovery from a hangover is usually just a matter of time. Most hangovers are gone within 24 hours. Electrolyte solutions (such as sports drinks) and bouillon soup are good for replacing the salt and potassium you lose from drinking alcohol. Get plenty of rest. Even if you feel good the morning after heavy drinking, the lasting effects of alcohol reduce your ability to perform at your best. Avoid taking any medicines for your hangover that contain acetaminophen (such as Tylenol). Acetaminophen may cause liver damage when combined with alcohol. Images 
 
 
 Hangover remedies 
 References 
 
 Finnell JT. Alcohol-related disease. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 185. O'Connor PG. Alcohol use disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia