
 Head injury - first aid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A head injury is any trauma to the scalp, skull, or brain. The injury may be only a minor bump on the skull or a serious brain injury. Head injury can be either closed or open (penetrating). A closed head injury means you received a hard blow to the head from striking an object, but the object did not break the skull. An open, or penetrating, head injury means you were hit with an object that broke the skull and entered the brain. This is more likely to happen when you move at high speed, such as going through the windshield during a car accident. It can also happen from a gunshot to the head.  Head injuries include: Concussion , in which the brain is shaken, is the most common type of traumatic brain injury. Scalp wounds. Skull fractures.  Head injuries may cause bleeding: In the brain tissue In the layers that surround the brain ( subarachnoid hemorrhage ,  subdural hematoma ,  extradural hematoma )  Head injury is a common reason for an emergency room visit. A large number of people who suffer head injuries are children. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) accounts for over 1 in 6 injury-related hospital admissions each year. Causes 
 
 Common causes of head injury include:  Accidents at home, work, outdoors, or while playing sports Falls Physical assault Traffic accidents Most of these injuries are minor because the skull protects the brain. Some injuries are severe enough to require a stay in the hospital. Symptoms 
 
 Head injuries may cause bleeding in the brain tissue and the layers that surround the brain (subarachnoid hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma). Symptoms of a head injury can occur right away. Or symptoms can develop slowly over several hours or days. Even if the skull is not fractured, the brain can hit the inside of the skull and be bruised. The head may look fine, but problems could result from bleeding or swelling inside the skull. The spinal cord is also likely to be injured in any serious trauma. Some head injuries cause changes in brain function. This is called a traumatic brain injury. Concussion is a mild traumatic brain injury.  Symptoms of a concussion  can range from mild to severe. First Aid 
 
 Learning to recognize a serious head injury and give basic first aid can save someone's life. For a moderate to severe head injury, CALL 911 RIGHT AWAY.  Get medical help right away if the person: Becomes very sleepy Behaves abnormally Develops a severe headache or stiff neck Has pupils (the dark central part of the eye) of unequal sizes Is unable to move an arm or leg Loses consciousness, even briefly Vomits more than once Then take the following steps: Check the person's airway, breathing, and circulation. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and  CPR . If the person's breathing and  heart rate  are normal but the person is unconscious, treat as if there is a  spinal injury . Stabilize the head and neck by placing your hands on both sides of the person's head. Keep the head in line with the spine and prevent movement. Wait for medical help. Stop any bleeding by firmly pressing a clean cloth on the wound. If the injury is serious, be careful not to move the person's head. If blood soaks through the cloth, do not remove it. Place another cloth over the first one. If you suspect a skull fracture, do not apply direct pressure to the bleeding site, and do not remove any debris from the wound. Cover the wound with sterile gauze dressing. If the person is vomiting, to prevent choking, roll the person's head, neck, and body as one unit onto their side. This still protects the spine, which you must always assume is injured in the case of a head injury. Children often vomit once after a head injury. This may not be a problem, but call a doctor for further guidance. Apply ice packs to swollen areas.  DO NOT 
 
 Follow these precautions: Do NOT wash a head wound that is deep or bleeding a lot. Do NOT remove any object sticking out of a wound. Do NOT move the person unless absolutely necessary. Do NOT shake the person if he or she seems dazed. Do NOT remove a helmet if you suspect a serious head injury. Do NOT pick up a fallen child with any sign of head injury. Do NOT drink alcohol within 48 hours of a serious head injury.  A serious head injury that involves bleeding or brain damage must be treated in a hospital. For a mild head injury, no treatment may be needed. However, watch for symptoms of a head injury, which can show up later.  Your health care provider will explain what to expect, how to manage any headaches, how to treat your other symptoms, when to return to sports, school, work, and other activities, and signs or symptoms to worry about. Children will need to be watched and make activity changes . Adults also need close observation and activity changes .  Both adults and children must follow the provider's instructions about when it will be possible to return to sports. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 right away if: There is severe head or face bleeding. The person is confused, tired, or unconscious. The person stops breathing. You suspect a serious head or  neck injury , or the person develops any signs or symptoms of a serious head injury.  Prevention 
 
 Not all head injuries can be prevented. The following  simple steps  can help keep you and your child safe: Always use safety equipment during activities that could cause a head injury. These include seat belts, bicycle or motorcycle helmets, and hard hats. Learn and follow  bicycle safety recommendations . Do not drink and drive, and do not allow yourself to be driven by someone who you know or suspect has been drinking alcohol or is impaired in another way.  Alternative Names 
 
 Brain injury; Head trauma Images 
 
 
 Concussion 
 Bicycle helmet - proper usage 
 Head injury 
 Intracerebellar hemorrhage - CT scan 
 Indications of head injury 
 References 
 
 Heegaard WG, Biros MH, Head injury. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 41. Liebig CW, Congeni JA. Sports-related traumatic brain injury (concussion). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 688. Read More 
 
 Concussion 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Concussion - adults - discharge 
 Concussion in children - discharge 
 Concussion - what to ask your doctor - adult  
 Concussion - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Preventing head injuries in children 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Head Injuries 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia