
 Healthy living 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Good health habits can allow you to avoid illness and improve your quality of life. The following steps will help you feel better and live better. Get regular  exercise  and control your weight. Don't smoke. Do NOT drink a lot of alcohol. Avoid alcohol completely if you have a history of alcoholism. Use the medicines your health care provider gives you as directed. Eat a balanced and healthy diet. Take care of your teeth. Manage high blood pressure. Follow good safety practices.  EXERCISE Exercise  is a key factor in staying healthy. Exercise strengthens the bones, heart, and lungs, tones muscles, improves vitality, relieves depression, and helps you sleep better. Talk to your provider before  starting an exercise program  if you have health conditions such as obesity, high blood pressure, or diabetes. This can help ensure that your exercise is safe and that you get the most of out of it.  SMOKING Cigarette smoking  is the main preventable cause of death in the United States. One out of every 5 deaths each year is either directly or indirectly caused by smoking. Secondhand cigarette smoke exposure can cause lung cancer in nonsmokers. Secondhand smoke is also linked to heart disease.  It is never too late to quit smoking. Talk to your provider or nurse about  medicines  and  programs  that can help you quit.  ALCOHOL USE Drinking alcohol changes many brain functions. Emotions, thinking, and judgment are first to be affected. Continued drinking will affect motor control, causing slurred speech, slower reactions, and poor balance. Having a higher amount of body fat and drinking on an empty stomach will speed up the effects of alcohol.  Alcoholism  can lead to diseases including: Diseases of the liver and pancreas Cancer and other diseases of the esophagus and digestive tract Heart muscle damage Brain damage Do NOT drink alcohol when you are pregnant. Alcohol can cause serious harm to the unborn baby and lead to  fetal alcohol syndrome .  Parents should talk to their children about the dangerous effects of alcohol. Talk to your provider if you or someone close to you has a problem with alcohol. Many people whose lives have been affected by alcohol get benefit from taking part in an  alcohol support group .  DRUG AND MEDICINE USE  Drugs and medicines affect people in different ways. Always tell your provider about the all drugs you are taking. This includes over-the-counter medicines and vitamins. Drug interactions can be dangerous. Older people need to be very careful about interactions when they are taking many medicines. All of your providers should know all the medicines you are taking. Carry the list with you when you go for checkups and treatments. Avoid drinking alcohol while taking medicines. This can cause serious problems. The combination of alcohol and tranquilizers or painkillers can be deadly.  Pregnant women should not take any drug or medicine without talking to the provider. This includes over-the-counter medicines. The unborn baby is even more sensitive to the harm from drugs in the first 3 months. Tell your provider if you have been taking any drugs just before becoming pregnant.  
 Always take  medicines  as prescribed. Taking any drug in a way other than prescribed or taking too much can cause serious health problems. It is considered  drug abuse . Abuse and addiction are not just associated with illegal "street" drugs. Legal drugs such as laxatives, painkillers, nasal sprays, diet pills, and cough medicines can also be misused. Addiction is defined as continuing to use a substance even though you are experiencing problems related to the use. Simply needing a drug (like a painkiller or antidepressant) and taking it as prescribed is not addiction. DEALING WITH STRESS Stress  is normal. It can be a great motivator and help in some cases. But too much stress can cause health problems such as trouble sleeping, stomach upset, anxiety, and mood changes. Learn to recognize the things most likely to cause stress in your life. You may not be able to avoid all stress but knowing the source can help you feel in control. The more control you feel you have over your life, the less damaging the stress in your life will be.  OBESITY Obesity  is a serious health concern. Excess body fat can overwork the heart, bones, and muscles. It can also increase your risk for developing high blood pressure, stroke, varicose veins, breast cancer, and gallbladder disease. Obesity can be caused by eating too much and eating unhealthy foods. Lack of exercise also plays a part. Family history may be a risk for some people as well.  DIET Having a  balanced diet  is important to being in good health.  Choose foods that are low in saturated and trans fat, and low in cholesterol. Limit your intake of sugar, salt (sodium), and alcohol. Eat more fiber, which can be found in fruits, vegetables, beans, whole grain products, and nuts.  TOOTH CARE Good  dental care  can help you keep your teeth and gums healthy for a lifetime. It is important for children to begin good dental habits when they are young. For proper dental hygiene: Brush your teeth twice a day and floss at least once daily. Use fluoride toothpaste. Get regular dental checkups. Limit sugar intake. Use a toothbrush with soft bristles. Replace your toothbrush when bristles get bent.  Have your dentist show you the proper ways to brush and floss. Alternative Names 
 
 Healthy habits Images 
 
 
 Exercise 30 minutes a day 
 Exercise with friends 
 Exercise - a powerful tool 
 References 
 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk factors: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Topic Page. June 2012. PMID: 25155419  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25155419 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Counseling and interventions to prevent tobacco use and tobacco-caused disease in adults and pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement. Topic Page. April 2009. PMID: 19380855  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19380855 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Prevention of dental caries in children from birth through age 5 years: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Topic Page. May 2014. PMID 24799546  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24799546 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: recommendation statement. PMID: 15068984  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15068984 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for illicit drug use: staged systematic review for the United States Preventive Services Task Force [Internet]. Topic Page. January 2008. PMID: 20722153  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20722153 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for obesity in adults: recommendations and rationale. Topic Page. June 2012. PMID: 14644896  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14644896 . 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Healthy Living 
 Browse the Encyclopedia