
 Hemangioma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hemangioma is an abnormal buildup of blood vessels in the skin or internal organs. Causes 
 
 About one third of hemangiomas are present at birth. The rest appear in the first several months of life. The hemangioma may be:  In the top skin layers ( capillary hemangioma ) Deeper in the skin (cavernous hemangioma) A mixture of both Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a hemangioma are: A red to reddish-purple, raised sore (lesion) on the skin A massive, raised, tumor with blood vessels  Most hemangiomas are on the face and neck. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam to diagnose a hemangioma. If the buildup of blood vessels is deep inside the body, a  CT  or  MRI  scan may be needed. A hemangioma may occur with other rare conditions. Other tests to check for related problems may be done. Treatment 
 
 The majority of small or uncomplicated hemangiomas may not need treatment. They often go away on their own and the appearance of the skin returns to normal. Sometimes, a laser may be used to remove the small blood vessels. Cavernous hemangiomas that involve the eyelid and block vision can be treated with lasers or steroid injections to shrink them. This allows vision to develop normally. Large cavernous hemangiomas or mixed hemangiomas may be treated with steroids, taken by mouth or injected into the hemangioma. Taking beta-blocker medicines may also help reduce the size of a hemangioma. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Small superficial hemangiomas will often disappear on their own. About half go away by age 5, and almost all disappear by age 9. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur from a hemangioma: Bleeding (especially if the hemangioma is injured) Problems with breathing and eating Psychological problems, from skin appearance Secondary infections  and sores Visible changes in the skin Vision problems  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 All birthmarks, including hemangiomas, should be evaluated by your health care provider during a regular exam.  Hemangiomas of the eyelid that may cause problems with vision must be treated soon after birth. Hemangiomas that interfere with eating or breathing also need to be treated early. Call your provider if a hemangioma is bleeding or develops a sore. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent hemangiomas. Alternative Names 
 
 Cavernous hemangioma; Strawberry nevus; Birthmark - hemangioma Images 
 
 
 Hemangioma - angiogram 
 Hemangioma on the face (nose) 
 Circulatory system 
 Hemangioma excision 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 23. Martin KL. Vascular disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 650. Patterson JW. Vascular tumors. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Amblyopia 
 Birthmarks - red 
 Secondary infections 
 Strabismus 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Birthmarks 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia