
 Hemorrhoids 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the anus or lower part of the rectum.  Causes 
 
 Hemorrhoids are very common. They result from increased pressure on the anus. This can occur during pregnancy, childbirth, and due to constipation. The pressure causes the normal anal veins and tissue to swell. This tissue can bleed, often during bowel movements. Hemorrhoids may be caused by: Straining during bowel movements Constipation Sitting for long periods of time, especially on the toilet Certain diseases, such as liver  cirrhosis Hemorrhoids may be inside or outside the body. Internal hemorrhoids occur just inside the anus, at the beginning of the rectum. When they are large they may fall outside (prolapse). The most common problem with internal hemorrhoids is bleeding during bowel movements. External hemorrhoids occur outside the anus. They can result in difficulty cleaning the area after a bowel movement. If a blood clot forms in an external hemorrhoid, it can be very painful (thrombosed external hemorrhoid).  Symptoms 
 
 Hemorrhoids are most often not painful, but if a blood clot forms, they can be very painful. Common symptoms include: Painless bright red blood from the rectum Anal itching Anal ache or pain, especially while sitting Pain during bowel movements One or more hard tender lumps near the anus  Exams and Tests 
 
 Most of the time, a health care provider can often diagnose hemorrhoids simply looking at the rectal area. External hemorrhoids can often be detected this way.  Tests that may help diagnose the problem include: Rectal exam Sigmoidoscopy Anoscopy Treatment 
 
 Treatments for hemorrhoids include: Over-the-counter corticosteroid (for example, cortisone) creams to help reduce pain and swelling Hemorrhoid creams with lidocaine to help reduce pain Stool softeners help reduce straining and constipation  Things you can do to reduce itching include: Apply witch hazel to the area with a cotton swab. Wear cotton underwear. Avoid toilet tissue with perfumes or colors. Use baby wipes instead. Try not to scratch the area.  Sitz baths can help you to feel better. Sit in warm water for 10 to 15 minutes. If your hemorrhoids do not get better with home treatments, you may need some type of office treatment to shrink the hemorrhoids. If office treatment is not enough, some type of surgery may be necessary, such as removal of the hemorrhoids ( hemorrhoidectomy ). These procedures are generally used for people with severe bleeding or prolapse who have not responded to other therapy. Possible Complications 
 
 The blood in the hemorrhoid may form  clots . This can cause tissue around it to die. Surgery is sometimes needed to remove hemorrhoids with clots. Rarely, severe bleeding may also occur.  Iron deficiency anemia  can result from long-term blood loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for your health care provider if: Hemorrhoid symptoms do not improve with home treatment.  You have rectal bleeding. Your provider may want to check for other, more serious causes of the bleeding. Get medical help right away if: You lose a lot of blood You are bleeding and feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faint Prevention 
 
 Constipation, straining during bowel movements, and sitting on the toilet too long raise your risk for hemorrhoids. To prevent constipation and hemorrhoids, you should: Drink plenty of fluids. Eat a high-fiber diet of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Consider using fiber supplements. Use stool softeners to prevent straining.  Alternative Names 
 
 Rectal lump; Piles; Lump in the rectum  Images 
 
 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Hemorrhoid surgery  - series 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Hemorrhoids. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:pp. 591. Nelson H. Anus. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 53. Sneider EB, Maykel JA. Diagnosis and management of symptomatic hemorrhoids.  Surg Clin North Am . 2010;(1):17-32. PMID: 20109630  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20109630 .  Read More 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Browse the Encyclopedia