
 Hemoglobin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen. The hemoglobin test measures how much hemoglobin is in your blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The hemoglobin test is a common test and is almost always done as part of a  complete blood count  (CBC). Reasons or conditions for ordering the hemoglobin test include: Symptoms such as fatigue, poor health, or unexplained weight loss Signs of bleeding Before and after major surgery During pregnancy Chronic kidney disease or many other chronic medical problems Monitoring of anemia and its cause Monitoring during treatment for cancer Monitoring medicines that may cause anemia or low blood counts  Normal Results 
 
 Normal results for adults vary, but in general are: Male: 13.8 to 17.2 grams per deciliter (g/dL) or 138 to 172 grams per liter (g/L) Female: 12.1 to 15.1 g/dL or 121 to 151 g/L Normal results for children vary, but in general are: Newborn: 14 to 24 g/dL or 140 to 240 g/L Infant: 9.5 to 13 g/dL or 95 to 130 g/L The ranges above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 LOWER THAN NORMAL HEMOGLOBIN Low hemoglobin level may be due to: Anemia caused by red blood cells dying earlier than normal ( hemolytic anemia ) Anemia (various types) Bleeding from digestive tract  or bladder, heavy menstrual periods Chronic kidney disease Bone marrow being unable to produce new red blood cells. This may be due to  leukemia , other cancers, drug toxicity, radiation therapy, infection, or bone marrow disorders Poor nutrition  (including low level of iron, folate, vitamin B12, or vitamin B6) Low level of iron,  folate ,  vitamin B12 , or  vitamin B6 Other chronic illness, such as rheumatoid arthritis  HIGHER THAN NORMAL HEMOGLOBIN High hemoglobin level is most often caused by low oxygen levels in the blood (hypoxia), present over a long period of time. Common reasons include: Certain birth defects of the heart that are present at birth ( congenital heart disease ) Failure of the right side of the heart ( cor pulmonale ) Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Scarring or thickening of the lungs ( pulmonary fibrosis ) and other severe lung disorders  Other reasons for high hemoglobin level includes: A rare bone marrow disease that leads to an abnormal increase in the number of blood cells ( polycythemia vera ) The body having too little water and fluids (dehydration)  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Hgb; Hb; Anemia - Hb; Polycythemia - Hb Images 
 
 
 Hemoglobin 
 References 
 
 Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 158. Goljan EF. Red blood cell disorders. In: Goljan EF, eds.  Rapid Review Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Anemia of chronic disease 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Bleeding 
 CBC blood test 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Diabetes 
 Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia 
 Erythropoietin test 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Hemoglobin C disease 
 Hemoglobin electrophoresis 
 Hemolysis 
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
 Immune hemolytic anemia 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 Lead poisoning 
 Malnutrition 
 Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH) 
 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Placenta abruption - definition 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Polymyalgia rheumatica 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Temporal arteritis 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Vitamin B12 
 Vitamin B6 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Count Tests 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia