
 Hemolytic crisis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemolytic crisis occurs when large numbers of red blood cells are destroyed over a short time. The loss of red blood cells occurs much faster than the body can produce new red blood cells. Considerations 
 
 During a hemolytic crisis, the body cannot make enough red blood cells to replace those that are destroyed. This causes  acute  and often severe  anemia . The part of red blood cells that carries oxygen (hemoglobin) is released into the bloodstream. This can lead to kidney damage. Causes 
 
 Causes of hemolysis include: A lack of certain proteins inside red blood cells Autoimmune diseases Certain infections Defects in the hemoglobin molecules inside red blood cells Defects of the proteins that make up the internal framework of red blood cells Side effects of certain medicines Reactions to blood transfusions  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Symptoms of anemia, including pale skin or fatigue, especially if these symptoms get worse Urine that is red, red-brown, or brown (tea-colored) What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Emergency treatment may be necessary. This may include a hospital stay, oxygen, blood transfusions, and other treatments. When your condition is stable, your provider will perform a  physical examination  and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The physical exam may show swelling of the spleen ( splenomegaly ). Tests that may be done include: Blood chemistry  panel Complete blood count ( CBC ) Coombs test Haptoglobin Hemoglobin -- blood Hemoglobin -- urine Kidney or  abdominal CT scan Kidney or  abdominal ultrasound Treatment depends on the cause of hemolysis. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemolysis - acute References 
 
 Ezenkwele UA. Emergency management of red blood cell disorders. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 204. Gallagher PG. Hemolytic anemias: red blood cell membrane and metabolic defects. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 161. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Anemia 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Hematocrit 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hemolysis 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia