
 Henoch-Schönlein purpura 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a disease that involves purple spots on the skin, joint pain, gastrointestinal problems, and  glomerulonephritis  (a type of kidney disorder). Causes 
 
 Henoch-Schönlein is caused by an abnormal response of the immune system. The result is inflammation in the microscopic blood vessels in the skin. Blood vessels in the joints, kidneys, or the intestines may also be affected. It is unclear why this occurs. The syndrome is mostly seen in children, but it may affect people of any age. It is more common in boys than in girls. Many people who develop this disease had an upper respiratory infection in the weeks before. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Joint pain Purple spots on the skin ( purpura ), usually over the buttocks, lower legs, and elbows Bloody diarrhea Hives  or  angioedema Nausea Diarrhea Painful menstruation Vomiting  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will look at your body and look at your skin. The physical exam will show skin sores (purpura, lesions) and joint tenderness. Tests may include: Skin biopsy Urinalysis Blood tests to look for other causes of blood vessel inflammation, such as systemic lupus erythematosus or hepatitis  Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment. Most cases go away on their own. If symptoms do not go away, you need to take corticosteroid medicine such as prednisone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease most often gets better on its own. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding inside the body Kidney problems (in rare cases)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of Henoch-Schönlein purpura, and they last for more than a few days. You have  low urine output  after an episode of Henoch-Schönlein purpura.  Alternative Names 
 
 Leukocytoclastic vasculitis; Anaphylactoid purpura; Vascular purpura  Images 
 
 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on the lower legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's foot 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on the legs 
 References 
 
 Ardoin SP, Fels E. Vasculitis syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton B, St. Geme J, Schor N, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 161. Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Henoch-Schöenlein purpura. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, eds.  Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 87. Read More 
 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 Immune response 
 Renal 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia