
 Hepatomegaly 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatomegaly is swelling of the liver beyond its normal size. If both the liver and  spleen  are enlarged, it is called hepatosplenomegaly. Considerations 
 
 The lower edge of the liver normally comes just to the lower edge of the ribs on the right side. The edge of the liver is normally thin and firm. It cannot be felt with the fingertips below the edge of the ribs, except when you take a deep breath. It may be enlarged if a health care provider can feel it in this area. Causes 
 
 The liver is involved in many of the body's functions. It is affected by many conditions that can cause hepatomegaly, including: Alcohol use Cancer  metastases  (spread of cancer to the liver) Congestive heart failure Glycogen storage disease Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hepatocellular carcinoma Hereditary fructose intolerance Infectious mononucleosis Leukemia Niemann-Pick disease Primary biliary cirrhosis Reye syndrome Sarcoidosis Sclerosing cholangitis Steatosis (fat in the liver from metabolic problems such as diabetes, obesity, and high triglycerides, also called nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition is most often discovered by a health care provider. You may not be aware of the liver or spleen swelling. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions such as: Did you notice a fullness or lump in the abdomen? What other symptoms do you have? Is there any  abdominal pain ? Is there any yellowing of the skin (jaundice)? Is there any vomiting? Is there any unusual-colored or  pale-colored stools ? Have you had a fever? What medicines are you taking including over-the-counter and herbal medicines? How much alcohol do you drink?  Tests to determine the cause of hepatomegaly vary, depending on the suspected cause, but may include: Abdominal x-ray Abdominal ultrasound  (may be done to confirm the condition if the doctor thinks your liver feels enlarged during a physical exam) CT scan of the abdomen Liver function tests , including blood clotting tests MRI scan of the abdomen Alternative Names 
 
 Hepatosplenomegaly; Enlarged liver; Liver enlargement Images 
 
 
 Liver fattening, CT scan 
 Liver with disproportional fattening, CT scan 
 Hepatomegaly 
 References 
 
 Martin P. Approach to the patient with liver disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 146. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Splenomegaly 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia