
 Hepatic ischemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatic ischemia is a condition in which the liver does not get enough blood or oxygen, causing injury to liver cells. Causes 
 
 Low blood pressure  from any condition can lead to hepatic ischemia. Such conditions may include: Abnormal heart rhythms Dehydration Heart failure Infection Severe bleeding Other causes may include: Blood clots in the main artery to the liver (hepatic artery) after a liver transplant Swelling of blood vessels leading to reduced blood flow (vasculitis) Symptoms 
 
 If low blood pressure continues for a long time, you may feel weak and lightheaded. However, the period of low blood pressure may be brief and produce no symptoms. Damage to the liver cells most often does not cause symptoms until it affects liver function. Blood clots in the liver's main artery may cause abdominal pain. Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests will be done: Blood tests to check liver function ( AST  and  ALT  ) Doppler ultrasound of the liver's blood vessels Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause. Low blood pressure and blood clots must be treated right away. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People generally recover if the illness causing hepatic ischemia can be treated. Death from liver failure due to hepatic ischemia is very rare. Possible Complications 
 
 Liver failure is a rare, but life-threatening complication. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider right away if you have persistent weakness or symptoms of  shock  or  dehydration . Prevention 
 
 Quickly treating the causes of low blood pressure may prevent hepatic ischemia. Alternative Names 
 
 Ischemic hepatitis; Shock liver Images 
 
 
 Liver blood supply 
 References 
 
 Hauser SC. Vascular diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 143. Valla DC. Vascular disease of the liver. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Heart failure - overview 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Diseases 
 Low Blood Pressure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia