
 Hereditary ovalocytosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hereditary ovalocytosis is a rare condition passed down through families (inherited). The blood cells are oval-shaped instead of round. It is a form of  hereditary elliptocytosis . Causes 
 
 Ovalocytosis is mainly found in Southeast Asian populations. Symptoms 
 
 Newborn infants with ovalocytosis may have  anemia  and  jaundice . Adults most often do not show symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam by your health care provider may show an enlarged spleen. This condition is diagnosed by looking at the shape of blood cells under a microscope. The following tests may also be done: Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for anemia or red blood cell destruction Blood smear to determine cell shape Bilirubin level  (may be high) Lactate dehydrogenase level (may be high) Ultrasound of the abdomen (may show gallstones)  Treatment 
 
 In severe cases, the disease may be treated by removal of the spleen ( splenectomy ). Possible Complications 
 
 The condition may be associated with  gallstones  or kidney problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Ovalocytosis - hereditary Images 
 
 
 Ovalocytoses 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Gallagher PG. Hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 161. Segel GB. Hereditary elliptocyctosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 459. Read More 
 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Hereditary elliptocytosis 
 Spleen removal 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Disorders 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia