
 Hereditary elliptocytosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hereditary elliptocytosis is a disorder passed down through families in which the red blood cells are abnormally shaped. It is similar to other blood conditions such as  hereditary spherocytosis  and  hereditary ovalocystosis . Causes 
 
 Elliptocytosis affects about 1 in every 2,500 people of northern European heritage. It is more common in people of African and Mediterranean descent. You are more likely to develop this condition if someone in your family has had it. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Fatigue Shortness of breath Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice). May continue for a long time in a newborn.  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam by your health care provider may show an  enlarged spleen . The following test results may help diagnose the condition: Bilirubin  level may be high. Blood smear may show elliptical red blood cells. Complete blood count  (CBC) may show anemia or signs of red blood cell destruction. Lactate dehydrogenase level may be high. Ultrasound of the gallbladder may show gallstones. Treatment 
 
 There is no treatment needed for the disorder unless severe anemia or anemia symptoms occur. Surgery to remove the spleen may decrease the rate of red blood cell damage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with hereditary elliptocytosis have no problems. They often do not know they have the condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Elliptocytosis is often harmless. In mild cases, fewer than 15% of red blood cells are elliptical-shaped. However, some people may have crises in which the red blood cells rupture. This is more like to happen when they have a viral infection. People with this disease can develop anemia, jaundice, and gallstones.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call provider if you have jaundice that does not go away or symptoms of anemia or gallstones. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be appropriate for people with a family history of this disease who wish to become parents.  Alternative Names 
 
 Elliptocytosis - hereditary  Images 
 
 
 Red blood cells, elliptocytosis 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Gallagher PG. Hemolytic anemias In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 161. Segel GB. Hereditary elliptocytosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 459. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Gallstones 
 Hemoglobin 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Disorders 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia