
 Herpes viral culture of lesion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Herpes viral culture of a lesion is a laboratory test to check if a skin sore is infected with the herpes simplex virus.
 How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider collects the sample from a  skin sore (lesion) . The sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if the herpes simplex virus (HSV) or substances related to the virus grow. Special tests may also be done to determine whether it is HSV type 1 or 2. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 The sample must be collected during the acute phase of infection. This is the worst part of an outbreak. It is also when the skin lesions are at their worst. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the sample is collected, you may feel an uncomfortable scraping or sticky sensation. Sometimes a sample from the throat or eyes is needed. This involves rubbing a sterile swab against the eye or in the throat. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to confirm herpes simplex infection. The herpes virus causes  genital herpes . It can also cause  cold sores  of the mouth and lips.  The diagnosis is often made by physical examination (the provider looking at the sores). The cultures and other tests are used to confirm the diagnosis. This test is most likely accurate when a person is newly infected, that is, during the first outbreak. Normal Results 
 
 A normal (negative) result means that the herpes simplex virus did not grow in the laboratory dish and the skin sample used in the test did not contain any herpes virus. Be aware that a normal (negative) culture does not always mean that you do not have a herpes infection or have not had one in the past.
 What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal (positive) result may mean that you have an active infection with herpes simplex virus. Herpes infections include  herpes genitalis , which is genital herpes, or cold sores on the lips or in the mouth. If the culture is positive for herpes, you may have recently become infected. You may have become infected in the past and are currently having an outbreak.
 Risks 
 
 Risks include slight bleeding or infection in the area where the skin sample was removed. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - herpes simplex virus; Herpes simplex virus culture Images 
 
 
 Viral lesion culture 
 References 
 
 Costello M, Sabatini LM, Yungbluth M. Viral infections. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 55. Marks JG, Miller JJ. Dermatologic therapy and procedures. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Asymptomatic 
 Genital herpes 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genital Herpes 
 Herpes Simplex 
 Browse the Encyclopedia