
 High arch 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 High arch is an arch that is raised more than normal. The arch runs from the toes to the heel on the bottom of the foot. It is also called pes cavus. High arch is the opposite of  flat feet . Causes 
 
 High foot arches are much less common than flat feet. They are more likely to be caused by a bone (orthopedic) or nerve (neurological) condition. Unlike flat feet, highly arched feet tend to be painful because more stress is placed on the section of the foot between the ankle and toes (metatarsals). This condition can make it difficult to fit into shoes. People who have high arches most often need foot support. A high arch may cause disability. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Shortened foot length Difficulty fitting shoes Foot pain  with walking, standing, and running (not everyone has this symptom)  Exams and Tests 
 
 When the person stands on the foot, the instep looks hollow. Most of the weight is on the back and balls of the foot (metatarsals head). Your health care provider will check to see if the high arch is flexible, meaning it can be moved around. Tests that may be done include: Electromyography MRI of the spine Nerve conduction studies X-ray  of the feet X-ray of the spine Treatment 
 
 High arches, especially ones that are flexible or well cared for, may not need any treatment. Corrective shoes may help relieve pain and improve walking. This includes changes to the shoes, such as an arch insert and a support insole. Surgery to flatten the foot is sometimes needed in severe cases. Any nerve problems that exist must be treated by specialists. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the condition causing high arches. In mild cases, wearing proper shoes and arch supports may provide relief. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Chronic  pain Difficulty walking When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you suspect you are having foot pain related to high arches. Prevention 
 
 People with highly arched feet should be checked for nerve and bone conditions. Finding these other conditions may help prevent or reduce arch problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Pes cavus; High foot arch References 
 
 Hosalkar HS, Spiegel DA, Davidson RS. Cavus Feet. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 666.7. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Walking abnormalities 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foot Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia