
 High potassium level 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 High potassium level is a problem in which the amount of potassium in the blood is higher than normal. The medical name of this condition is hyperkalemia. Causes 
 
 Potassium is needed for cells to function properly. You get potassium through food. The kidneys remove excess potassium through the urine to keep a proper balance of this mineral in the body. If your kidneys are not working well, they may not be able to remove the proper amount of potassium. As a result, potassium can build up in the blood. This buildup can be due to:  Addison disease . Disease in which the  adrenal glands  do not make enough hormones. Burns over large areas of the body Certain blood pressure lowering drugs, most often  angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors  and angiotensin receptor blockers. Damage to muscle and other cells from certain street drugs, alcohol abuse, untreated seizures, surgery, crush injuries and falls, certain chemotherapy, or certain infections. Disorders that cause blood cells to burst ( hemolytic anemia ) Severe bleeding from the stomach or intestines Taking extra potassium, such as salt substitutes or supplements Tumors  Symptoms 
 
 There are often no symptoms with a high level of potassium. When symptoms do occur, they may include: Nausea Slow, weak, or irregular pulse Sudden collapse, when the heartbeat gets too slow or even stops  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Electrocardiogram (ECG) Potassium level  Your provider will likely check your  blood potassium level  and do  kidney blood tests  on a regular basis if you: Have been prescribed extra potassium Have chronic kidney disease Take medicines to treat heart disease or high blood pressure Use salt substitutes  Treatment 
 
 You will need emergency treatment if your potassium level is very high, or if you have danger signs, such as changes in an  ECG . Emergency treatment may include: Calcium given into your veins (IV) to treat the muscle and heart effects of high potassium levels Glucose and insulin given into your veins (IV) to help lower potassium levels long enough to correct the cause Kidney dialysis if your kidney function is poor Medicines that help remove potassium from the intestines before it is absorbed Sodium bicarbonate if the problem is caused by acidosis Some water pills (diuretics)  Changes in your diet can help both prevent and treat high potassium levels. You may be asked to: Limit or avoid asparagus, avocados, potatoes, tomatoes or tomato sauce, winter squash, pumpkin, and cooked spinach Limit or avoid oranges and orange juice, nectarines, kiwifruit, raisins, or other dried fruit, bananas, cantaloupe, honeydew, prunes, and nectarines Avoid taking salt substitutes if you are asked to eat a  low-salt diet Your provider may make the following changes to your medicines: Reduce or stop potassium supplements Stop or change the doses of medicines you are taking, such as ones for heart disease and high blood pressure Take a certain type of water pill to reduce potassium and fluid levels if you have chronic kidney failure  Follow your provider's directions when taking your medicines: DO NOT stop or start taking medicines without first talking to your provider Take your medicines on time Tell your provider about any other medicines, vitamins, or supplements you are taking  Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperkalemia; Potassium - high; High blood potassium Images 
 
 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Kamel KS, Lin SH, Yang SS, Halperin M. Clinical disorders of hyperkalemia. In: Alpern RJ, Moe OW, Caplan M, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 51. Seifter JL. Potassium disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 117. Read More 
 
 Acidosis 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Addison disease 
 Aldosterone blood test 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Kidney transplant 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Metabolism 
 Obstructive uropathy 
 Potassium test 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Potassium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia