
 Hip pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hip pain involves any pain in or around the hip joint. You may not feel pain from your hip directly over the hip area. You may feel it in your groin or pain in your thigh or knee.  Causes 
 
 Hip pain may be caused by problems in the bones or cartilage of your hip, including:  Hip fractures  – can cause sudden hip pain. These injuries can be serious and lead to major problems. Hip fractures are more common as people get older because falls are more likely and your bones become weaker. Infection in the  bones  or  joints Osteonecrosis of the hip (necrosis from loss of blood supply to the bone) Arthritis  -- often felt in the front part of the thigh or groin Labral tear of the hip Pain in or around the hip may also be caused by problems such as: Bursitis – pain when getting up from a chair, walking, climbing stairs, and driving Hamstring  strain Iliotibial band syndrome Hip flexor strain Hip impingement syndrome Groin strain Snapping hip syndrome Pain you feel in the hip may reflect a problem in your back, rather than in the hip itself. Home Care 
 
 Steps you can do to lessen hip pain include: Try to avoid activities that make pain worse. Take over-the-counter pain medication, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen. Sleep on the side of your body that does not have pain. Put a pillow between your legs. Lose weight if you are overweight. Ask your health care provider for help. Try not to stand for long periods of time. If you must stand, do so on a soft, cushioned surface. Stand with an equal amount of weight on each leg. Wear flat shoes that are cushioned and comfortable.  Things you can do to avoid hip pain related to overuse or physical activity include: Always warm up before exercising and cool down afterward. Stretch your quadriceps and hamstrings. Avoid running straight down hills. Walk down instead. Swim instead of run or bicycle. Run on a smooth, soft surface, such as a track. Avoid running on cement. If you have flat feet, try special shoe inserts and arch supports (orthotics). Make sure your running shoes are made well, fit well, and have good cushioning. Cut down the amount of exercise you do.  See your provider before exercising your hip if you think you may have arthritis or have injured your hip. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to a hospital or get emergency help if: Your hip pain is caused by a serious fall or other injury. Your leg is deformed, badly bruised, or bleeding. You are unable to move your hip or bear any weight on your leg.  Call your provider if: Your hip is still painful after 1 week of home treatment. You also have a  fever  or rash. You have sudden hip pain, plus  sickle cell anemia  or long-term steroid use. You have pain in both hips and other joints.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam with careful attention to your hips, thighs, back, and the way you walk. To help diagnose the cause of the problem, your provider will ask questions about:  Where you feel the pain When and how the pain started Things that make the pain worse What you have done to relieve the pain Your ability to walk and support weight Other medical problems you have Medicines you take You may need x-rays of your hip or an MRI scan.  Your provider may tell you to take a higher dose of over-the-counter medication. You may also need a prescription anti-inflammatory medication. Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - hip Images 
 
 
 Hip fracture 
 Arthritis in hip 
 References 
 
 Brooks AG, Redmond J, Domb BG. Hip diagnosis and decision making. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 80. Huddleston JI, Goodman SB. Hip and knee pain. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 48.  Read More 
 
 Hip fracture surgery 
 Hip joint replacement 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Hip fracture - discharge  
 Hip or knee replacement - after - what to ask your doctor  
 Hip or knee replacement - before - what to ask your doctor  
 Hip replacement - discharge  
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hip Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia