
 His bundle electrography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 His bundle electrography is a test that measures electrical activity in a part of the heart that carries the signals that control the time between heartbeats (contractions). How the Test is Performed 
 
 The bundle of His is a group of fibers that carry electrical impulses through the center of the heart. If these signals are blocked, you will have problems with your heartbeat. Watch this video about: Cardiac conduction system The His bundle electrography is part of an  electrophysiology  (EP) study. An  intravenous  catheter (IV line) is inserted into your arm so that you can be given medicines during the test. Electrocardiogram  (ECG) leads are placed on your arms and legs. Your arm, neck, or groin will be cleaned and numbed with a local anesthetic. After the area is numb, the cardiologist makes a small cut in a vein and inserts a thin tube called a catheter inside. The catheter is carefully moved through the vein up into the heart. An  x-ray  method called fluoroscopy helps guide the doctor to the right place. During the test, you are watched for any abnormal heartbeats ( arrhythmias ). The catheter has a sensor on the end, which is used to measure the electrical activity of the bundle of His. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will be told not to eat or drink anything for 6 to 8 hours before the test. The test will be done in a hospital. Some people may need to check into the hospital the night before the test. Otherwise, you will check in the morning of the test. Although the test may take some time, most people DO NOT need to stay in the hospital overnight. Your health care provider will explain the procedure and its risks. You must sign a consent form before the test starts. About half an hour before the procedure, you will be given a mild sedative to help you relax. You will wear a hospital gown. The procedure may last from 1 to several hours. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You are awake during the test. You may feel some discomfort when the IV is placed into your arm, and some pressure at the site when the catheter is inserted. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to: Determine if you need a pacemaker or other treatment Diagnose  arrhythmias Find the specific location where electrical signals through the heart are blocked Normal Results 
 
 The time between electrical signals from the bundle of His are evenly spaced.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A pacemaker will be needed if the test results are abnormal. Abnormal results may mean you have or had: Chronic conduction system disease Carotid sinus pressure Recent  heart attack Atrial disease Risks 
 
 Risks of the procedure include: Arrhythmias Cardiac tamponade Embolism from blood clots at the tip of the catheter  Heart attack Hemorrhage Infection Injury to the vein or artery Low blood pressure Stroke Alternative Names 
 
 His bundle electrogram; HBE; His bundle recording; Electrogram - His bundle; Arrythmia - His; Heart block - His Images 
 
 
 ECG 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. H. In Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap H;602-667. Miller JM, Zipes DP. Diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmias. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 34. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Heart attack 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia