
 Hives 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hives are raised, often itchy, red bumps (welts) on the surface of the skin. They are usually an allergic reaction to food or medicine. They can also appear without cause. Causes 
 
 When you have an allergic reaction to a substance, your body releases histamine and other chemicals into the blood. This causes itching, swelling, and other symptoms. Hives are a common reaction. Persons with other allergies, such as hay fever, often get hives. When swelling or welts occur around the face, especially the lips and eyes, it is called  angioedema . Swelling can also occur around your hands, feet, and throat. Many substances can trigger hives, including: Animal dander (especially cats) Insect bites Medicines Pollen Shellfish, fish, nuts, eggs, milk, and other foods Hives may also develop as a result of: Emotional stress Extreme cold or sun exposure Excessive perspiration Illness, including  lupus , other  autoimmune diseases , and  leukemia Infections such as  mononucleosis Exercise Exposure to water Often, the cause of hives is not known. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of hives may include any of the following: Itching Swelling of the surface of the skin into red- or skin-colored welts (called wheals) with clearly defined edges. Wheals may get bigger, spread, and join together to form larger areas of flat, raised skin.  Wheals can also change shape, disappear, and reappear within minutes or hours.You know you have hives when you press the center of a wheal, it turns white. This is called blanching. Dermatographism is a type of hives. It is caused by pressure on the skin and results in immediate hives.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can tell if you have hives by looking at your skin. If you have a history of an allergy, the diagnosis is even clearer. Sometimes, a  skin biopsy  or blood tests are done to confirm that you had an allergic reaction, and to test for the substance that caused the allergic response. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may not be needed if the hives are mild. They may disappear on their own. To reduce itching and swelling: Do not take hot baths or showers. Do not wear tight-fitting clothing, which can irritate the area. Your provider may suggest that you take an antihistamine such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl). Follow your provider's instructions or the package instructions about how to take the medicine. If your reaction is severe, especially if the swelling involves your throat, you may need an emergency shot of epinephrine (adrenaline) or steroids. Hives in the throat can block your airway, making it difficult to breathe. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hives may be uncomfortable, but they are usually harmless and disappear on their own. In most cases, the exact cause of hives cannot be identified. When the condition lasts longer than 6 weeks, it is called chronic hives. Often, no cause can be found. Possible Complications 
 
 Anaphylaxis  (a life-threatening, whole-body allergic reaction that causes breathing difficulty) Swelling in the throat can lead to life-threatening airway blockage When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have: Fainting Shortness of breath Tightness in your throat Tongue or face swelling Wheezing Call your health care provider if the hives are severe, uncomfortable, and do not respond to self-care measures. Prevention 
 
  To help prevent hives: Avoid exposure to substances that give you allergic reactions.
   Do not wear tight-fitting clothing and do not take hot baths or showers just after having hives. These can cause hives to return. Alternative Names 
 
 Urticaria; Wheals; Nettle rash; Angioedema; Quincke edema Images 
 
 
 Hives (urticaria) - close-up 
 Food allergies 
 Hives (urticaria) on the chest 
 Hives (urticaria) on the trunk 
 Hives (urticaria) on the chest 
 Hives (urticaria) on the back and buttocks 
 Hives (urticaria) on the back 
 Hives 
 Hives treatment 
 References 
 
 

Grattan CEH. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 18. Saini SS. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds. In:  Middleton's Allergy Principles and Practice.  8th ed.  Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Angioedema 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Mononucleosis 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Hives 
 Browse the Encyclopedia