
 Homocystinuria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Homocystinuria is an inherited disorder that affects the  metabolism  of the  amino acid  methionine. Amino acids are the building blocks of life. Causes 
 
 Homocystinuria is inherited in families as an  autosomal recessive  trait. This means that the child must inherit a non-working copy of the gene from each parent to be seriously affected. Homocystinuria has several features in common with  Marfan syndrome , including joint and eye changes. Symptoms 
 
 Newborn infants appear healthy. Early symptoms, if present, are not obvious. Symptoms may occur as mildly delayed development or  failure to thrive . Increasing  visual problems  may lead to diagnosis of this condition. Other symptoms include: Chest deformities ( pectus carinatum ,  pectus excavatum ) Flush across the cheeks High arches of the feet Intellectual disability Knock knees Long limbs Mental disorders Nearsightedness Spidery fingers ( arachnodactyly ) Tall, thin build  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may notice that the child is tall and thin. Other signs include: Curved spine ( scoliosis ) Deformity of the chest Dislocated lens of the eye  If there is poor or double vision, an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) will perform a dilated eye exam to look for dislocation of the lens or nearsightedness. There may be a history of blood clots. Intellectual disability or mental illness is also possible. Tests that may be ordered include any of the following: Amino acid screen of blood and urine Genetic testing Liver biopsy  and  enzyme assay Skeletal  x-ray Skin biopsy  with a fibroblast culture Standard ophthalmic exam Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for homocystinuria. About half of people with the disease respond to  vitamin B6  (also known as pyridoxine).  Those who do respond will need to take vitamin B6, B9 (folate), and B12 supplements for the rest of their lives. Those who do not respond will need to eat a low-methionine diet. Most will need to be treated with trimethylglycine (a medicine also known as betaine). Neither a low-methionine diet nor medicine will improve existing intellectual disability. Medicine and diet should be closely supervised by a doctor who has experience treating homocystinuria. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Although no cure exists for homocystinuria, vitamin B therapy can help about half of people affected by the condition. If the diagnosis is made in childhood, starting a low-methionine diet quickly may prevent some intellectual disability and other complications of the disease. For this reason, some states screen for homocystinuria in all newborns. People whose blood homocysteine levels continue to rise are at increased risk for blood clots. Clots can cause serious medical problems and shorten lifespan. Possible Complications 
 
 Most serious complications result from blood clots. These episodes can be life-threatening. Dislocated lenses of the eyes can seriously damage vision. Lens replacement surgery may be needed. Intellectual disability is a serious consequence of the disease. But, it can be reduced if diagnosed early. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or a family member shows symptoms of this disorder, especially if you have a family history of homocystinuria. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for people with a family history of homocystinuria who want to have children.  Intrauterine  diagnosis of homocystinuria is available. This involves culturing amniotic cells or chorionic villi to test for cystathionine synthase (the enzyme that is missing in homocystinuria). If there are known gene defect in the parents or family, samples from  chorionic villus sampling  or  amniocentesis  can be used to test for these defects. Alternative Names 
 
 Cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency; CBS deficiency; HCY Images 
 
 
 Pectus excavatum 
 References 
 
 Rezvani I, Melvin JJ. Defects in metabolism of amino acids. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 85.3. Rezvani I, Melvin JJ. Picker JD, Levy HL. Homocystinuria caused by cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.  GeneReviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2014:11. PMID: 20301697  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301697 . Schiff M, Blom H. Homocystinuria and hyperhomocysteinemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 209. Read More 
 
 Arachnodactyly 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Blood clots 
 Dislocation 
 Failure to thrive 
 High arch 
 Intellectual disability 
 Knock knees 
 Marfan syndrome 
 Metabolism 
 Nearsightedness 
 Scoliosis 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia