
 How to make a sling 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sling is a device used to support and keep still (immobilize) an injured part of the body.  Slings can be used for many different injuries. They are most often used when you have a broken ( fractured ) or  dislocated  arm or shoulder. Considerations 
 
 If an injury needs a  splint , apply the splint first and then apply the sling. Always check the person's skin color and pulse (circulation) after the injured body part has been splinted. Loosen the splint and bandage if: The area becomes cool or turns pale or blue Numbness or tingling develops in the injured body part Injuries to nerves or blood vessels often occur with an arm injury. The health care provider should check circulation, movement, and feeling in the injured area often. The purpose of a splint is to prevent movement of the broken or dislocated bone. Splints reduce pain, and help prevent further damage to muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. Splinting also reduces the risk of opening a closed injury. First Aid 
 
 Care for all  wounds  before applying a splint or sling. If you can see bone in the injured site, call your local emergency number (such as 911) or local hospital for advice. HOW TO MAKE A SLING Find a piece of cloth that is about 5 feet (1.5 meters) wide at the base and at least 3 feet (1 meter) long on the sides. (If the sling is for a child, you can use a smaller size.) Cut a triangle out of a piece of this cloth. If you don't have scissors handy, fold a large square piece of cloth diagonally into a triangle. Place the person's elbow at the top point of the triangle, and the wrist midway along the triangle's bottom edge. Bring the 2 free points up around the front and back of the same (or opposite) shoulder. Adjust the sling so the arm rests comfortably, with the hand higher than the elbow. The elbow should be bent at a right angle. Tie the sling together at the side of the neck and pad the knot for comfort. If the sling was placed correctly, the person's arm should rest comfortably against his or her chest with the fingertips exposed.  Other tips: If you do not have material or scissors to make a triangle sling, you can make one using a coat or a shirt. You can also make a sling using a belt, rope, vine, or sheet. If the injured arm should be kept still, tie the sling to the body with another piece of cloth wrapped around the chest and tied on the uninjured side. Occasionally check for tightness, and adjust the sling as needed.  DO NOT 
 
 Do NOT try to realign an injured body part unless the skin looks pale or blue, or there is no pulse. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical help if the person has a dislocation, broken bone, or severe bleeding. Also get medical help if you cannot completely immobilize the injury at the scene by yourself. Prevention 
 
 Safety is the best way to avoid broken bones caused by falling. Some diseases make bones break more easily. Use caution when helping a person with fragile bones.  Activities that  strain  the muscles or bones for long periods of time should be avoided, because these can cause  weakness  and falls. Use care when walking on slippery or uneven surfaces. Alternative Names 
 
 Sling - instructions  Images 
 
 
 Triangular shoulder sling 
 Shoulder sling 
 Creating a sling - series 
 References 
 
 Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L. Priority first-aid equipment, supplies, and medications. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:appendix G. Klimke A, Furin M. Prehospital immobilization. In: Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 46. Read More 
 
 How to make a splint 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dislocations 
 First Aid 
 Fractures 
 Browse the Encyclopedia