
 Huntington disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Huntington disease is a disorder in which nerve cells in certain parts of the brain waste away, or degenerate. The disease is passed down through families. Causes 
 
 Huntington disease is caused by a genetic defect on chromosome 4. The defect causes a part of DNA to occur many more times than it is supposed to. This defect is called a CAG repeat. Normally, this section of DNA is repeated 10 to 28 times. But in persons with Huntington disease, it is repeated 36 to 120 times. As the gene is passed down through families, the number of repeats tends to get larger. The larger the number of repeats, the higher a person's chance of developing symptoms at an earlier age. Therefore, as the disease is passed along in families, symptoms develop at younger and younger ages. There are two forms of Huntington disease: Adult-onset is the most common. Persons with this form usually develop symptoms in their mid-30s or 40s. Early-onset affects a small number of people and begins in childhood or the teens.  If one of your parents has Huntington disease, you have a 50% chance of getting the gene. If you get the gene from your parents, you can pass it on to your children, who will also have a 50% chance of getting the gene. If you do not get the gene from your parents, you cannot pass the gene on to your children. Symptoms 
 
 Behavior changes may occur before movement problems, and can include: Behavioral disturbances Hallucinations Irritability Moodiness Restlessness or fidgeting Paranoia Psychosis Abnormal and unusual movements include: Facial movements, including grimaces Head turning to shift eye position Quick, sudden, sometimes wild jerking movements of the arms, legs, face, and other body parts Slow, uncontrolled movements Unsteady gait Dementia that slowly gets worse, including: Disorientation or confusion Loss of judgment Loss of memory Personality changes Speech changes Additional symptoms that may be associated with this disease: Anxiety, stress, and tension  
 Difficulty swallowing 
  Speech impairment Symptoms in children: Rigidity Slow movements Tremor Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and may ask about the patient's family history and symptoms. An exam of the nervous system will also be done. The doctor may see signs of: Dementia Abnormal movements Abnormal reflexes "Prancing" and wide walk Hesitant speech or poor enunciation Other tests that may show signs of Huntington disease include: 
  Psychological testing Head  CT  or  MRI  scan
   PET (isotope) scan of the brain Genetic testing is available to determine whether a person carries the gene for Huntington disease. Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for Huntington disease. There is no known way to stop the disease from getting worse. The goal of treatment is to slow the symptoms and help the person function for as long as possible. Medicines can be prescribed, depending on the symptoms. Dopamine blockers may help reduce abnormal behaviors and movements. Drugs such as amantadine and tetrabenazine are used to try to control extra movements. Depression and suicide are common among persons with Huntington disease. It is important for caregivers to monitor for symptoms and seek medical help for the person right away. As the disease progresses, the person will need assistance and supervision, and may eventually need 24-hour care. Support Groups 
 
 Huntington's Disease Society of America --  hdsa.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Huntington disease causes disability that gets worse over time. Persons with this disease usually die within 15 to 20 years. The cause of death is often infection.  Suicide  is also common. It is important to realize that the disease affects everyone differently. The number of CAG repeats may determine the severity of symptoms. Persons with few repeats may have mild abnormal movements later in life and slow disease progression. Those with a large number of repeats may be severely affected at a young age. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or a family member develops symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is advised if there is a family history of Huntington disease. Experts also recommend genetic counseling for couples with a family history of this disease who are considering having children. Alternative Names 
 
 Huntington chorea References 
 
 Jankovic J. Movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 71. Mink JW. Movement disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 597. Read More 
 
 Dementia 
 Depression - overview 
 Movement - unpredictable or jerky 
 Muscle atrophy 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Huntington's Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia