
 Hydromorphone overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hydromorphone is a prescription medicine used to relieve severe pain. Hydromorphone overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Hydromorphone is a type of morphine. Hydromorphone is an opioid narcotic, which means it is an extremely powerful drug that can cause very deep sleep. People who take hydromorphone for pain should not drink alcohol. Combining alcohol with this drug increases the chance for dangerous side effects and overdose symptoms. Where Found 
 
 Medicines with these names contain hydromorphone: Dilaudid Hydrostat  Other medicines may also contain hydromorphone. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a hydromorphone overdose include: Bluish-colored fingernails and lips Breathing problems, including  slow and labored breathing ,  shallow breathing , or  no breathing . Cold, clammy skin Coma Confusion Dizziness Drowsiness Fatigue Lightheadedness Loss of consciousness Low blood pressure Muscle twitches Pinpoint pupils Spasms  of the stomach and intestines Weakness Weak pulse  Warning:  A severe overdose of hydromorphone can cause death. Home Care 
 
 This can be a serious overdose. Seek medical help right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready:  Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  DO NOT delay calling for help if you don't have this information. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.  The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Laxative Medicine to reverse the effect of the hydromorphone and treat symptoms Tube from the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who quickly receive medicine (called an antidote) to reverse the effect of hydromorphone can recover within 1 to 4 hours. They may need to stay in the hospital for more doses of the antidote.  Complications such as pneumonia, muscle damage from lying on a hard surface for a long period of time, or brain damage from lack of oxygen may result in permanent disability. However, unless there are complications, long-term effects and death are rare. Alternative Names 
 
 Dilaudid overdose; Palladone overdose References 
 
 Miner JR, Burton J. Pain management. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 3. Yip L, Megarbane B, Borron SW. Opioids. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 33. Zhou YL. Principles of pain management. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 44. 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Opioid Abuse and Addiction 
 Browse the Encyclopedia