
 Hydrocele 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hydrocele is a fluid-filled sac in the  scrotum . Causes 
 
 Hydroceles are common in newborn infants. During a baby’s development in the womb, the testicles descend from the abdomen through tube into the scrotum. Hydroceles occur when this tube does not close. Fluid drains from the abdomen through the open tube and gets trapped in the scrotum. This causes the scrotum to swell. Most hydroceles go away a few months after birth. Sometimes, a hydrocele may occur with an  inguinal hernia . Hydroceles may also be caused by: Buildup of the normal fluid around the testicle. This may occur because the body makes too much of the fluid or it does not drain well. (This type of hydrocele is more common in older men.) Inflammation or injury of the testicle or epididymis Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a painless,  swollen testicle , which feels like a water balloon. A hydrocele may occur on one or both sides. Exams and Tests 
 
 You will have a physical exam. The health care provider will find that the scrotum is swollen, but not painful to the touch. Often, the testicle cannot be felt because of the fluid around it. The size of the fluid-filled sac can sometimes be increased and decreased by putting pressure on the abdomen or the scrotum. If the size of the fluid collection changes, it is more likely to be due to an inguinal hernia. Hydroceles can be easily seen by shining a flashlight through the swollen part of the scrotum. If the scrotum is full of clear fluid, the scrotum will light up. You may need an  ultrasound  to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 Hydroceles are not harmful most of the time. They are treated only when they cause infection or discomfort. Hydroceles from an inguinal hernia should be fixed with surgery as soon as possible. Hydroceles that do not go away on their own after a few months may need surgery. A surgical procedure called a  hydrocelectomy  (removal of sac lining) is often done to correct the problem. Needle drainage does not work well because the fluid will come back.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Simple hydroceles in children often go away without surgery. In adults, hydroceles usually do not go away on their own. If surgery is needed, it is an easy procedure with very good outcomes.  Possible Complications 
 
 Risks from hydrocele surgery may include: Blood clots Infection Injury to the scrotum When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of hydrocele. It is important to rule out other causes of a  testicular lump . Pain in the scrotum or testicles is an emergency. If you have pain and your scrotum is enlarged, seek medical help right away to prevent the loss of the testicle. Alternative Names 
 
 Processus vaginalis; Patent processus vaginalis Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Hydrocele 
 References 
 
 Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testes and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132. Elder JS. Disorders and anomalies of the scrotal contents. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 545. Kavoussi PK, Costabile RA. Surgery of the scrotum and seminal vesicles. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 37. Wampler SM, Llanes M. Common scrotal and testicular problems.  Prim Care . 2010;37:613-626. PMID: 20705202  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20705202 . 
  Read More 
 
 Hernia 
 Scrotum 
 Transillumination 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia