
 Hypervitaminosis A 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypervitaminosis A is having too much  vitamin A  in the body. Causes 
 
 Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin that is stored in the liver. Many foods contain vitamin A, including: Meat, fish, and poultry Dairy products Some fruits and vegetables  Some dietary supplements also contain Vitamin A. Too much vitamin A can make you sick. Large doses of vitamin A during pregnancy can cause birth defects. Acute vitamin A poisoning occurs quickly, most often when an adult takes several hundred thousand international units (IUs) of vitamin A. Chronic  vitamin A poisoning may occur over time in adults who regularly take more than 25,000 IU a day. Babies and children are more sensitive to vitamin A. They can become sick after taking smaller doses of vitamin A or if they swallow products that contain vitamin A, such as skin cream with retinol in it. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abnormal softening of the skull bone (in infants and children) Blurred vision Bone pain  or swelling 
  Bulging of the soft spot in an infant's skull ( fontanelle ) Changes in alertness or consciousness Decreased appetite Dizziness Double vision (in young children) Drowsiness Hair changes, such as  hair loss  and oily hair Headache Irritability Liver damage Nausea Poor  weight gain  (in infants and children) Skin changes, such as cracking at corners of the mouth, higher sensitivity to sunlight, oily skin, peeling, itching, and yellow color to the skin Vision changes Vomiting  Exams and Tests 
 
 These tests may be done if a high vitamin A level is suspected: Bone x-rays Blood calcium test Cholesterol test Liver function test Blood test to check  vitamin A  level Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves simply stopping supplements (or rarely, foods) that contain vitamin A. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people fully recover. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can include: Excessively high calcium level Failure to thrive  (in infants) Kidney damage due to high calcium Liver damage  Taking too much vitamin A during pregnancy may cause abnormal development in the growing baby. Talk to your health care provider about eating a proper diet while you are pregnant. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you think that you or your child may have taken too much vitamin A, or you have symptoms of excess vitamin A. Prevention 
 
 How much  vitamin A  you need depends on your age and gender. Other factors, such as pregnancy and your overall health, are also important. Ask your provider what amount is best for you. To avoid hypervitaminosis A, avoid taking more than the recommended daily allowance of this vitamin. Recent emphasis on vitamin A and  beta carotene  as anticancer vitamins may contribute to chronic hypervitaminosis A if people take more than is recommended. Alternative Names 
 
 Vitamin A toxicity Images 
 
 
 Vitamin A source 
 References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, US Panel on Micronutrients. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. National Academies Press. Washington, DC, 2001. PMID: 25057538  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057538 . Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 218. Ross AC, Tan L. Vitamin A deficiencies and excess. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Appetite - decreased 
 Bone pain or tenderness 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Chronic 
 Drowsiness 
 Failure to thrive 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Pseudotumor cerebri 
 Seborrheic dermatitis 
 Vision problems 
 Vitamin A 
 Weight gain - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vitamin A 
 Browse the Encyclopedia