
 Hyperactivity and sugar 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hyperactivity means an increase in movement, impulsive actions, being easily distracted, and  shorter attention span . Some people believe that children are more likely to be  hyperactive  if they eat sugar, artificial sweeteners, or certain food colorings. Other experts disagree with this. Side Effects 
 
 Some people claim that eating sugar (such as sucrose), aspartame (NutraSweet), and artificial flavors and colors lead to hyperactivity and other behavior problems in children. They argue that children should follow a diet that limits these substances. Activity levels in children vary with their age. A 2-year old is usually more active, and has a shorter attention span, than a 10-year old. A child's attention level also will vary depending on his or her interest in an activity. Adults may view the child's level of activity differently depending on the situation. For example, an active child at the playground may be OK. However, a lot of activity late at night may be viewed as a problem. In some cases, a special diet of foods without artificial flavors or colors works for a child, because the family and the child interact in a different way when the child eliminates these foods. These changes, not the diet itself, may improve the behavior and activity level. Refined (processed) sugars may have some effect on children's activity. Refined sugars and carbohydrates enter the bloodstream quickly. Therefore, they cause rapid changes in blood sugar levels. This may make a child become more active. Several studies have shown a link between artificial colorings and hyperactivity. On the other hand, other studies do not show any effect. This issue is yet to be decided. Recommendations 
 
 There are many reasons to limit the sugar a child has other than the effect on activity level. A diet high in sugar is a major cause of tooth decay. High-sugar foods tend to have fewer vitamins and minerals. These foods may replace foods with more nutrition. High-sugar foods also have extra calories that can lead to obesity. Some people have allergies to dyes and flavors. If a child has a diagnosed allergy, talk to a dietitian. Add fiber to your child's diet to keep blood sugar levels more even. For breakfast, fiber is found in oatmeal, shredded wheat, berries, bananas, whole-grain pancakes. For lunch, fiber is found in whole-grain breads, peaches, grapes, and other fresh fruits. Provide "quiet time" so that children can learn to calm themselves at home. Talk to your health care provider if your child cannot sit still when other children of his or her age can, or cannot control impulses.  Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - hyperactivity References 
 
 Kemper KJ. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In: Rakel D, ed.  Integrative Medicine . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 6.  Lyon M, Murray MT. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.  Textbook of Natural Medicine . 4th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 150 Read More 
 
 Hyperactivity 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
 Carbohydrates 
 Browse the Encyclopedia