
 Hypermobile joints 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypermobile joints are joints that move beyond the normal range with little effort. Joints most commonly affected are the elbows, wrists, fingers, and knees. Considerations 
 
 Children's joints are often more flexible than adults' joints. But children with hypermobile joints can flex and extend their joints beyond what is considered normal. The movement is done without too much force and without discomfort. Thick bands of tissue called ligaments help hold joints together and keep them from moving too much or too far. In children with hypermobility syndrome, those ligaments are loose or weak. This may lead to: Arthritis, which may develop over time Dislocated joints, which is a separation of two bones where they meet at a joint Sprains and strains  Children with hypermobile joints also often have flat feet. Causes 
 
 Hypermobile joints often occur in otherwise healthy and normal children. This is called benign hypermobility syndrome. Rare medical conditions associated with hypermobile joints include: Cleidocranial dysostosis Down syndrome Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Marfan syndrome Morquio syndrome Home Care 
 
 There is no specific care for this condition. People with hypermobile joints have an increased risk for  joint dislocation  and other problems. Extra care may be needed to protect the joints. Ask your health care provider for recommendations. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: A joint suddenly appears misshapen An arm or leg suddenly does not move properly Pain occurs when moving a joint The ability to move a joint suddenly changes or decreases  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Hypermobile joints often occur with other symptoms that, taken together, define a specific syndrome or condition. A diagnosis is based on a family history, medical history, and a complete physical exam. The exam includes a close look at your muscles and bones. The provider will ask about the symptoms, including: When did you first notice the problem? Is it getting worse or more noticeable? Are there other symptoms, such as swelling or redness around the joint? Is there any history of joint dislocation, difficulty walking, or difficulty using the arms?  Further tests may be done.  Alternative Names 
 
 Joint hypermobility; Loose joints; Hypermobility syndrome Images 
 
 
 Hypermobile joints 
 References 
 
 Deeney VF, Arnold J, Moreland MS, Ward WT, Davix HW. Orthopedics. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds.  Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Krakow D. Heritable diseases of connective tissue. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr., Gabriel SE, MacInnes IB, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 105. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Joint Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia