
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis is an extreme reaction to a drug, infection, or foreign substance. It leads to inflammation and damage to blood vessels, primarily in the skin. Causes 
 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis is caused by an  allergic reaction  to a drug or other foreign substance. It can also be a reaction to an infection. Most often it affects people older than age 15. Often, the cause of the problem cannot be found even with a careful study of medical history.  Hypersensitivity vasculitis may look like  necrotizing vasculitis , which can affect blood vessels throughout the body. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: New rash over large areas Purple-colored spots and patches on the skin Skin sores mostly located on the legs, buttocks, or trunk Blisters  on the skin Hives ( urticaria ), may last longer than 24 hours Open sores with dead tissue (necrotic  ulcers )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will base the diagnosis on symptoms. The provider will evaluate how your skin looks after you have taken certain medicines or are exposed to a foreign substance ( antigen ). Results from an  ESR test  (erythrocyte sedimentation rate test) may be high. Skin biopsy  shows inflammation of the small blood vessels. You may also have other tests to detect this condition. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce inflammation. Your provider may prescribe aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or corticosteroids to reduce inflammation of the blood vessels. (DO NOT give aspirin to children except as advised by your provider). Your provider will tell you to stop taking medicines that could be causing this condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis most often goes away over time. The condition may come back in some people. People with ongoing vasculitis should be checked for necrotizing vasculitis. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Lasting damage to the blood vessels or skin with scarring Inflamed blood vessels affecting the internal organs  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of hypersensitivity vasculitis. Prevention 
 
 DO NOT take medicines which have caused an allergic reaction in the past. Alternative Names 
 
 Allergic vasculitis; Leukocytoclastic vasculitis; Cutaneous vasculitis Images 
 
 
 Vasculitis on the palm 
 Vasculitis 
 Vasculitis, urticarial on the hand 
 References 
 
 Stone JH. The systemic vasculitides. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 270. Stone JH. Immune complex-mediated small vessel vasculitis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 91. Read More 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia