
 Hyperthyroidism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland makes too much thyroid hormone. The condition is often called overactive thyroid. Causes 
 
 The thyroid gland is an important organ of the  endocrine  system. It is located at the front of the neck just above where your collarbones meet. The gland makes the hormones that control the way every cell in the body uses energy. This process is called  metabolism . Many diseases and conditions can cause hyperthyroidism, including: Graves disease  (most common cause of hyperthyroidism) Inflammation (thyroiditis) of the thyroid due to viral infections, some medicines, or after pregnancy (common) Taking too much thyroid hormone (common) Noncancerous growths of the thyroid gland or pituitary gland (rare) Some tumors of the  testes  or ovaries (rare) Getting medical imaging tests with contrast dye that has iodine (rare, and only if there is a problem with the thyroid) Eating too much of foods that contain iodine (very rare, and only if there is a problem with the thyroid)  Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms include: Difficulty concentrating Fatigue Frequent bowel movements Goiter  (visibly enlarged thyroid gland) or  thyroid nodules Hair loss Hand tremor   Heat intolerance Increased appetite Increased sweating Irregular menstrual periods in women Nervousness Pounding or racing heart beat ( palpitations ) Restlessness Sleep problems Weight loss  (or weight gain, in some cases)  Other symptoms that can occur with this disease: Breast development in men Clammy skin Diarrhea High blood pressure Itchy or irritated eyes Itchy skin Nausea and vomiting Protruding eyes  (exophthalmos) Skin blushing or flushing Weakness  of the hips and shoulders  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. The exam may find the following: High systolic blood pressure (the first number in a blood pressure reading) Increased  heart rate Enlarged thyroid gland Shaking of the hands Swelling or inflammation around the eyes Very strong  reflexes Skin, hair, and nail changes Blood tests are also ordered to measure your thyroid hormones  TSH , T3, and T4. You may also have blood tests to check: Cholesterol levels Glucose Imaging tests of the thyroid may also be needed, including: Radioactive iodine uptake and scan Thyroid ultrasound Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause and severity of symptoms. Hyperthyroidism is usually treated with one or more of the following: Antithyroid medicines (propylthiouracil or methimazole) Radioactive iodine to destroy the thyroid gland and stop the excess production of hormones Surgery to remove the thyroid  If your thyroid is removed with surgery or destroyed with radioactive iodine, you must take thyroid hormone replacement pills for the rest of your life. Medicines called beta-blockers may be prescribed to treat symptoms such as fast heart rate, tremor, sweating, and anxiety until the hyperthyroidism can be controlled. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hyperthyroidism is treatable. Some causes may go away without treatment. Hyperthyroidism caused by Graves disease usually gets worse over time. It has many complications, some of which are severe and affect quality of life. Possible Complications 
 
 Thyroid crisis (storm) is a sudden worsening of hyperthyroidism symptoms that may occur with infection or stress. Fever, decreased alertness, and abdominal pain may occur. People need to be treated in the hospital. Other complications of hyperthyroidism include: Heart problems such as fast heart rate, abnormal heart rhythm, and heart failure Osteoporosis  Surgery-related complications, including:  Scarring of the neck Hoarseness due to nerve damage to the voice box Low calcium level due to damage to the parathyroid glands (located near the thyroid gland) Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Go to an emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have: Change in consciousness Dizziness Rapid, irregular heartbeat  Call your provider if you are being treated for hyperthyroidism and you develop symptoms of underactive thyroid, including: Depression Mental and physical sluggishness Weight gain  Alternative Names 
 
 Thyrotoxicosis; Overactive thyroid; Graves disease - hyperthyroidism; Thyroiditis - hyperthyroidism; Toxic goiter - hyperthyroidism; Thyroid nodules - hyperthyroidism; Thyroid hormone - hyperthyroidism Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Goiter 
 Brain-thyroid link 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Bahn RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists.  Endocr Pract . 2011;17(3):457-520. PMID: 21700562  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21700562 . Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Duke WS, Terris DJ. Hyperthyroidism. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:652-658. Ferri FF. Hyperthyroidism. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:623-624. Weiss RE, Refetoff S. Thyroid function testing. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Endocrine glands 
 Factitious hyperthyroidism 
 Fever 
 Graves disease 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Metabolism 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Silent thyroiditis 
 Testes 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Thyroid gland removal - discharge 
 Review Date 4/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia