
 Hyphema 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hyphema is blood in the front area (anterior chamber) of the eye. The blood collects behind the cornea and in front of the iris. Causes 
 
 Hyphema is most often caused by trauma to the eye. Other causes of bleeding in the front chamber of the eye include: Blood vessel abnormality Cancer of the eye Severe inflammation of the  iris Advanced  diabetes Blood disorders such as  sickle cell anemia Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Bleeding in the anterior chamber of the eye Eye pain Light sensitivity Vision abnormalities You may not be able to see a small hyphema when looking at your eye in the mirror. With a total hyphema, the collection of blood will block the view of the iris and pupil. Exams and Tests 
 
 You may need the following tests and exams: Eye exam Intraocular pressure measurement ( tonometry ) Ultrasound  testing  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may not be needed in mild cases. The blood is absorbed in a few days. If bleeding comes back (most often in 3 to 5 days), the likely outcome of the condition will be much worse. The health care provider may recommend the following to cut down the chance that there will be more bleeding: Bed rest Eye patching Sedating medicines  You may need to use eye drops to decrease the inflammation or lower the pressure in your eye. The eye doctor may need to remove the blood, especially if pressure in the eye is very high or the blood is slow to absorb again. You may need to stay in a hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends upon the amount of injury to the eye. People with  sickle cell disease  are more likely to have eye complications and must be watched closely. People with diabetes will probably need laser treatment for the problem. Severe vision loss can occur. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute glaucoma Impaired vision Recurring bleeding  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice blood in the front of the eye or if you have an eye injury. You will need to be examined and treated by an eye doctor right away, especially if you have decreased vision. Prevention 
 
 Many eye injuries can be prevented by wearing safety goggles or other protective eye wear. Always wear eye protection while playing sports, such as racquetball, or contact sports, such as basketball. Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Fudemberg SJ, Myers JS, Katz LJ, Spaeth GL. Glaucoma following trauma. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3; chap 54. Lam A, Benson WE, Jeffers JB. Blunt trauma. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3; chap 31. Tingey DP, Shingleton BJ. Glaucoma associated with ocular trauma. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 10.17. Read More 
 
 Glaucoma 
 Iris 
 
 Review Date 12/19/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Injuries 
 Browse the Encyclopedia