
 Hypomelanosis of Ito 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypomelanosis of Ito is a rare birth defect that causes unusual patches of light-colored ( hypopigmented ) skin and possible neurological and skeletal problems. Causes 
 
 Health care providers do not know the exact cause, but they believe it is a problem with genes. It is twice as common in girls than in boys. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Crossed eyes  (strabismus) Hearing problems Increased body hair ( hirsutism ) Scoliosis Seizures Streaked, whirled or mottled patches of skin on the arms, legs, and middle of the body Intellectual disability including  autism spectrum  and learning disability Mouth or tooth problems  Exams and Tests 
 
 A Wood's lamp examination of the  skin lesions  may help confirm the diagnosis. The provider may also recommend chromosome analysis or a further medical workup to discover any related medical problems. Treatment 
 
 There is no treatment for the skin patches. Cosmetics or clothing may be used to cover the patches. Seizures, scoliosis, and other problems are treated as needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 What happens depends on the type and severity of symptoms that develop. In most cases, skin color eventually returns to normal. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result from this condition include: Discomfort and walking problems due to scoliosis Emotional distress related to the physical appearance Intellectual disability Injury from seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child has an unusual pattern of the color of the skin. Alternative Names 
 
 Incontinentia pigmenti achromians Images 
 
 
 Incontinentia pigmenti - side 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Light-related diseases and disorders of pigmentaiton. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:chap 19. Patterson JW. Disorders of pigmentation. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Intellectual disability 
 Scoliosis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia