
 Hysterosalpingography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hysterosalpingography is a special x-ray using dye to look at the womb (uterus) and fallopian tubes. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done in a radiology department. You will lie on a table beneath an x-ray machine. You will place your feet in stirrups, like you do during a pelvic exam. A tool called a speculum is placed into the  vagina . After the  cervix  is cleaned, the health care provider places a thin tube (catheter) through the cervix. Dye, called contrast, flows through this tube, filling the womb and fallopian tubes. X-rays are taken. The dye makes these areas easier to see on  x-rays . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your provider may give you antibiotics to take before and after the test. This helps prevent infections. You may also be given medicines to take the day of the procedure to help you relax. The best time for this test is about 7 or 8 days after the bleeding from your menstrual period has stopped. Doing it at this time also reduces the risk for infection, and ensures that you are not pregnant.  Tell your provider if you have had an allergic reaction to contrast dye before.  You can eat and drink normally before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have some discomfort when the speculum is inserted into the vagina. This is similar to a pelvic exam with a Pap test. Some women have cramps during or after the test, like those you may get during your period.  You may have some pain if the dye leaks out of the tubes, or if the tubes are blocked. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to check for blockages in your fallopian tubes or other problems in the womb and tubes. It is often done as part of an infertility exam. It may also be done after you have your tubes tied to confirm that the tubes are fully blocked after you have had a hysteroscopic tubal occlusion procedure to prevent pregnancy.  Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means everything looks normal. There are no defects.  Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Developmental disorders of the structures of the uterus or fallopian tubes Scar tissue (adhesions) in the uterus or tubes Blockage of the fallopian tubes Presence of foreign bodies Tumors or polyps in the uterus  Risks 
 
 Risks may include: Allergic reaction to the contrast Endometrial infection ( endometritis ) Fallopian tube infection ( salpingitis ) Perforation of (poking a hole through) the uterus  Considerations 
 
 This test should not be performed if you have  pelvic inflammatory disease  (PID) or have unexplained  vaginal bleeding . After the test, tell your provider right away if you have any signs or symptoms of infection. These include foul-smelling  vaginal discharge , pain, or fever. Alternative Names 
 
 HSG; Uterosalpingography; Hysterogram; Uterotubography; Infertility - hysterosalpingography; Blocked fallopian tubes - hysterosalpingography Images 
 
 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 Broekmans FJ, Fauser BCJM. Female infertility. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Lobo RA. Infertility. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Adhesion 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Female Infertility 
 Browse the Encyclopedia