
 Hysterectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hysterectomy is surgery to remove a woman's womb (uterus). The uterus is a hollow muscular organ that nourishes the developing baby during pregnancy. Description 
 
 You may have all or part of the uterus removed during a hysterectomy. The fallopian tubes and ovaries may also be removed. There are many different ways to perform a hysterectomy. It may be done through:  A surgical cut in the belly (called open or abdominal) Three to four small surgical cuts in the belly and then using a laparoscope A surgical cut in the vagina, and using a laparoscope Three to four small surgical cuts in the belly, in order to perform robotic surgery  You and your doctor will decide which type of procedure. The choice will depend on your medical history and the reason for the surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 There are many reasons a woman may need a hysterectomy, including: Adenomyosis , a condition that causes heavy, painful periods Cancer of the uterus, most often  endometrial cancer Cancer of the cervix  or changes in the cervix called cervical dysplasia that may lead to cancer Cancer of the ovary Long-term (chronic) pelvic pain Severe  endometriosis  that does not get better with other treatments Severe, long-term  vaginal bleeding  that is not controlled with other treatments Slipping of the uterus into the vagina ( uterine prolapse ) Tumors in the uterus, such as  uterine fibroids Uncontrolled bleeding during childbirth  Hysterectomy is a major surgery. Some conditions can be treated with less invasive procedures such as:  Uterine artery embolization Endometrial ablation Using birth control pills Using pain medicines Using an IUD (intrauterine device) that releases the hormone progestin Pelvic laparoscopy Risks 
 
 Risks of any surgery are: Allergic reactions to medicines Breathing problems Blood clots , which may cause death if they travel to the lungs Bleeding Infection Injury to nearby body areas  Risks of a hysterectomy are: Injury to the bladder or ureters Pain during sexual intercourse Early menopause if the ovaries are removed Decreased interest in sex Increased risk of heart disease if the ovaries are removed before menopause Before the Procedure 
 
 Before deciding to have a hysterectomy, ask your health care provider what to expect after the procedure. Many women notice changes in their body and in how they feel about themselves after a hysterectomy. Talk with provider, family, and friends about these possible changes before you have surgery. Tell your health care team about all the medicines you are taking. These include herbs, supplements, and other medicines you bought without a prescription. During the days before the surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), clopidogrel (Plavix), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs like these. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your provider for help quitting. On the day of your surgery: You will most often be asked not to drink or eat anything for 8 hours before the surgery. Take any medicines your provider told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time. After the Procedure 
 
 After surgery, you will be given pain medicines.  You may also have a tube, called a catheter, inserted into your bladder to pass urine. Most of the time, the catheter is removed before leaving the hospital. You will be asked to get up and move around as soon as possible after surgery. This helps prevent  blood clots  from forming in your legs and speeds recovery. You will be asked to get up to use the bathroom as soon as you are able. You may return to a normal diet as soon as you can without causing nausea and vomiting. How long you stay in the hospital depends on the type of hysterectomy.  You can likely go home the next day when surgery is done through the vagina using a laparoscope or after robotic surgery. When a larger surgical cut (incision) in the abdomen is made, you may need to stay in the hospital 1 to 2 days. You may need to stay longer if the hysterectomy is done because of cancer.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How long it takes you to recover depends on the type of hysterectomy. Average recovery times are: Abdominal hysterectomy : 4 to 6 weeks Vaginal hysterectomy : 3 to 4 weeks Robot-assisted or total laparoscopic hysterectomy : 2 to 4 weeks  A hysterectomy will cause menopause if you also have your ovaries removed. Removal of the ovaries can also lead to a decreased sex drive. Your doctor may recommend  estrogen replacement therapy . Discuss with your provider the risks and benefits of this therapy. If the hysterectomy was done for cancer, you may need further treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Vaginal hysterectomy; Abdominal hysterectomy; Supracervical hysterectomy; Radical hysterectomy; Removal of the uterus; Laparoscopic hysterectomy; Laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy; LAVH; Total laparoscopic hysterectomy; TLH; Laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy; Robotically assisted hysterectomy Images 
 
 
 Pelvic laparoscopy 
 Hysterectomy 
 Uterus 
 Hysterectomy  - Series 
 References 
 
 ACOG Committee Opinion No. 444: choosing the route of hysterectomy for benign disease.  Obstet Gynecol . 2009;114(5):1156-1158. PMID: 20168127  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20168127 . Burney RO, Giudice LC. Endometriosis. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 130. Jones HW III. Gynecologic surgery. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 71. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): cervical cancer. Version 1.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cervical.pdf . Accessed April 18, 2016. Read More 
 
 Cervical cancer 
 Cervix 
 Endometriosis 
 Uterine fibroids 
 Vagina 
 Vaginal bleeding between periods 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Hysterectomy - abdominal - discharge 
 Hysterectomy - laparoscopic - discharge 
 Hysterectomy - vaginal - discharge  
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Uterine artery embolization - discharge  
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hysterectomy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia