
 IgA nephropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 IgA nephropathy is a kidney disorder in which antibodies called IgA build up in kidney tissue. Nephropathy is damage, disease, or other problems with the kidney. IgA nephropathy is also called Berger disease. Causes 
 
 IgA is a protein, called an  antibody , that helps the body fight infections. IgA nephropathy occurs when too much of this protein is deposited in the kidneys. IgA builds up inside the small blood vessels of the kidney. Structures in the kidney called glomeruli become inflamed and damaged. The disorder can appear suddenly ( acute ), or get worse slowly over many years (chronic  glomerulonephritis ). Risk factors include: A personal or family history of IgA nephropathy or Henoch Schonlein  purpura , a form of  vasculitis  that affects many parts of the body White or Asian ethnicity IgA nephropathy can occur in people of all ages, but it most often affects males in their teens to late 30s. Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms for many years. When there are symptoms, they may include: Bloody urine that starts during or soon after a respiratory infection Repeated episodes of dark or bloody urine Swelling of the hands and feet Symptoms of  chronic kidney disease Exams and Tests 
 
 IgA nephropathy is most often discovered when a person with no other symptoms of kidney problems has one or more episodes of dark or bloody urine. There are no specific changes seen during a physical examination. Sometimes, the blood pressure may be high or there may be swelling of the body. Tests include: Blood urea nitrogen  (BUN) test to measure kidney function Creatinine blood test  to measure kidney function Kidney biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis Urinalysis Urine immunoelectrophoresis Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms and prevent or delay  chronic renal failure . You may get medicines to control high blood pressure and swelling ( edema ), such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). Controlling blood pressure is the most important way to delay kidney damage. Corticosteroids, other drugs that suppress the immune system, and fish oil have also been used to treat this disorder. Salt and fluids may be restricted to control swelling. A low-to-moderate  protein  diet may be recommended in some cases. Some people need to take medicines to lower their cholesterol. Eventually, many people must be treated for chronic kidney disease and may need  dialysis . Support Groups 
 
 For additional information and support, see the IgA Nephropathy Support Network website ( www.igansupport.org ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 IgA nephropathy gets worse slowly. In many cases, it does not get worse at all. Your condition is more likely to get worse if you have: High blood pressure Large amounts of  protein in the urine Increased BUN or creatinine levels When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have bloody urine or if you are producing less urine than usual. Alternative Names 
 
 Nephropathy - IgA; Berger disease Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Feehally J, Floege J. IgA nephropathy and Henoch-Schonlein nephritis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 23. Ferri FF. IgA nephropathy. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:691-692. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Antibody 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Purpura 
 Urine - bloody  
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia