
 Immunoelectrophoresis - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urine immunoelectrophoresis is a lab test that measures immunoglobulins in a urine sample. Immunoglobulins are  proteins  that function as  antibodies , which fight infection. There are various types of these proteins. Some can be abnormal and may be due to cancer. Immunoglobulins can also be measured in the  blood .  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  clean-catch urine sample  is needed. The clean-catch method is used to prevent germs from the penis or vagina from getting into a urine sample. To collect your urine, the health care provider may give you a special clean-catch kit that contains a cleansing solution and sterile wipes. Follow instructions exactly. After you provide a urine sample, it is sent to the laboratory. There, the laboratory specialist will place the urine sample on special paper and apply an electric current. The various proteins move and form visible bands, which reveal the general amounts of each protein. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your provider may ask you to collect the first morning urine, which is the most concentrated. If you are taking the collection from an infant, you may need extra collection bags. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to measure the amounts of various immunoglobulins in urine. Most often, it is done after a large amount of protein is found in the urine. Normal Results 
 
 Normally there is no protein, or only a small amount of protein in the urine. When there is protein in the urine, it normally consists of mainly albumin. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Immunoglobulin in the urine can result from: An abnormal buildup of proteins in tissues and organs ( amyloidosis ) Leukemia Blood cancer called  multiple myeloma Kidney disorders such as  IgA nephropathy  or IgM nephropathy White blood cell cancer called  Waldenström macroglobulinemia Some people have monoclonal immunoglobulins, but do not have cancer. This is called monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance, or MGUS. Alternative Names 
 
 Immunoglobulin electrophoresis - urine; Gamma globulin electrophoresis - urine; Urine immunoglobulin electrophoresis; IEP - urine Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Protein electrophoresis – urine. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:920-923. McPherson RA. Specific proteins. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
 IgA nephropathy 
 Immunoelectrophoresis - blood 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Protein urine test 
 Urinalysis 
 Urine protein electrophoresis test 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Tests 
 Multiple Myeloma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia