
 Immune hemolytic anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Anemia is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to the body's tissues. Red blood cells last for about 120 days before the body gets rid of them. In hemolytic anemia, red blood cells in the blood are destroyed earlier than normal. Immune hemolytic  anemia  occurs when antibodies form against the body's own red blood cells and destroy them. This happens because the immune system mistakenly recognizes these blood cells as foreign. Causes 
 
 Possible causes include: Certain chemicals, drugs, and toxins Infections Transfusion of blood from a donor with a blood type that does not match Certain cancers  When  antibodies  form against red blood cells for no reason, the condition is called  idiopathic autoimmune hemolytic anemia . The antibodies may also be caused by: Complication of another disease Past blood transfusions Pregnancy (if the baby's blood type is different from the mother's) Risk factors are related to the causes. Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms if the anemia is mild. If the problem develops slowly, symptoms that may occur first include: Feeling weak or tired more often than usual, or with exercise Headaches Problems concentrating or thinking  If the anemia gets worse, symptoms may include: Lightheadedness when you stand up Pale skin color ( pallor ) Shortness of breath Sore tongue  Exams and Tests 
 
 You may need the following tests: Absolute  reticulocyte count Direct or indirect  Coombs test Hemoglobin  in the urine LDH  (level of this enzyme rises as a result of tissue damage) Red blood cell count  (RBC), hemoglobin, and  hematocrit Serum  bilirubin  level Serum free hemoglobin Serum haptoglobin Donath-Landsteiner test Cold agglutinins Free hemoglobin in the serum or urine  Hemosiderin in the urine  Platelet count Protein electrophoresis - serum Pyruvate kinase Serum haptoglobin level  Urine and fecal urobilinogen Treatment 
 
 The first treatment tried is most often a steroid medicine, such as prednisone. If steroid medicine do not improve the condition, treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or removal of the spleen (splenectomy) may be considered. You may receive treatment to suppress your immune system if you do not respond to steroids. Drugs such as azathioprine (Imuran), cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), and rituximab (Rituxan) have been used. Blood transfusions are given with caution, because the blood may not be compatible and it may cause more red blood cell destruction. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease may start quickly and be very serious, or it may stay mild and not need special treatment. In most people, steroids or splenectomy can totally or partially control anemia. Possible Complications 
 
 Severe anemia rarely leads to death. Severe infection may occur as a complication of treatment with steroids, other medicines that suppress the immune system, or splenectomy. These treatments impair the body's ability to fight infection. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have unexplained fatigue or chest pain, or signs of infection. Prevention 
 
 Screening for antibodies in donated blood and in the recipient may prevent hemolytic anemia related to blood transfusions.  Alternative Names 
 
 Anemia - immune hemolytic; Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Jager U, Lechner K. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 44. Michel M. Autoimmune and intravascular hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 160. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia