
 Increased head circumference 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Increased  head circumference  is when the measured distance around the widest part of the skull is larger than expected for the child's age and background. Considerations 
 
 A newborn's head is usually about 2 cm (centimeters) larger than the chest size. Between 6 months and 2 years, both measurements are about equal. After 2 years, the chest size becomes larger than the head. Measurements over time that show an increased rate of head growth often provide more valuable information than a single measurement that is larger than expected. Increased pressure inside the head ( increased intracranial pressure ) often occurs with increased head circumference. Symptoms of this condition include: Eyes moving downward Irritability Vomiting Causes 
 
 Increased head size may be from any of the following: Benign familial macrocephaly (family tendency toward large head size) Canavan disease Hurler syndrome Hydrocephalus  (congenital, post-traumatic, or obstructive) Intracranial bleeding Morquio syndrome When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 The health care provider usually finds an increased head size in a baby during a routine well-baby exam. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 A careful physical exam will be done. Other  milestones for growth and development  will be checked. In some cases, a single measurement is enough to confirm that there is a size increase that needs to be tested further. More often, repeated measurements of the head circumference over time are needed to confirm that the head circumference is increased and the problem is getting worse. Diagnostic tests that may be ordered include: Head CT scan MRI of the head Alternative Names 
 
 Macrocephaly Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 References 
 
 Robinson S, Cohen AR. Disorders in head shape and size. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Fontanelles - bulging 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Malformations 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia