
 Industrial bronchitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Industrial  bronchitis  is swelling (inflammation) of the large airways of the lungs that occurs in some people who work around certain dusts, fumes, smoke, or other substances. Causes 
 
 Exposure to dusts, fumes, strong acids, and other chemicals in the air causes this type of bronchitis. Smoking may also contribute. You may be at risk if you are exposed to dusts that contain: Asbestos Coal Cotton Flax Latex Metals Silica Talc Toluene diisocyanate Western red cedar Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Cough  that brings up mucus (sputum) Shortness of breath Wheezing Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen to your lungs using a stethoscope. Wheezing sounds or crackles may be heard. Tests that may be ordered include: Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Pulmonary function tests  (to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning) Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce the irritation. Getting more air into the workplace or wearing masks to filter out the offending dust particles may help. Some people may need to be taken out of the workplace. Some cases of industrial bronchitis go away without treatment. Other times, a person may need inhaled anti-inflammatory medicines. If you are at risk or have experienced this problem and you smoke, stop smoking. Helpful measures include: Breathing humidified air Increasing fluid intake Resting Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome may be good as long as you can stop being exposed to the irritant.  Chronic  disability from industrial bronchitis is rare. Possible Complications 
 
 Continued exposure to irritating gases, fumes, or other substances can lead to permanent lung damage. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you are regularly exposed to dusts, fumes, strong acids, or other chemicals that can affect the lungs and you develop symptoms of bronchitis. Prevention 
 
 Control dust in industrial settings by wearing face masks and protective clothing, and by treating textiles. Stop smoking if you are at risk. Get early screening by a doctor if you are exposed to chemicals that can cause this condition. If you think a chemical you work with is affecting your breathing, ask your employer for a copy of the Material Safety Data Sheet. Bring it with you to your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Occupational bronchitis Images 
 
 
 Bronchitis 
 Lung anatomy 
 Bronchitis and normal condition in tertiary bronchus 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Lemière C, Vandenplas O. Asthma in the workplace. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 72. Tarlo SM. Occupational lung disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Asbestosis 
 Bronchitis - acute 
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis 
 Occupational asthma 
 Silicosis  
 
 Review Date 11/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Bronchitis 
 Interstitial Lung Diseases 
 Occupational Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia