
 Insomnia - overview 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Insomnia is trouble falling asleep, staying asleep through the night, or waking up too early in the morning. Episodes of insomnia may come and go or be long-lasting. The quality of your sleep is as important as how much sleep you get. Causes 
 
 Sleep habits we learned as children may affect our sleep behaviors as adults. Poor sleep or lifestyle habits that may cause insomnia or make it worse include: Going to bed at a different time each night Daytime napping Poor sleeping environment, such as too much noise or light Spending too much time in bed while awake Working evenings or night shifts Not getting enough exercise Using the television, computer, or a mobile device in bed  The use of some medicines and drugs may also affect sleep, including: Alcohol or other drugs Heavy smoking Too much caffeine throughout the day or drinking caffeine late in the day Getting used to certain types of sleep medicines Some cold medicines and diet pills Other medicines, herbs, or supplements  Physical, social, and mental health issues can affect sleep patterns, including: Bipolar disorder . Feeling sad or depressed. (Often, insomnia is the symptom that causes people with depression to seek medical help.) Stress and anxiety, whether it is short-term or long-term. For some people, the stress caused by insomnia makes it even harder to fall asleep.  Health problems may also lead to problems sleeping and insomnia: Pregnancy Physical pain or discomfort. Waking up at night to use the bathroom, common in men with enlarged prostate Sleep apnea With age, sleep patterns  tend to change. Many people find that aging causes them to have a harder time falling asleep, and that they wake up more often. Symptoms 
 
 The most common complaints or symptoms in people with insomnia are: Trouble falling asleep on most nights Feeling tired during the day or falling asleep during the day Not feeling refreshed when you wake up Waking up several times during sleep  People who have insomnia are sometimes consumed by the thought of getting enough sleep. But the more they try to sleep, the more frustrated and upset they get, and the harder sleep becomes. Lack of restful sleep can: Make you tired and unfocused, so it is hard to do daily activities. Put you at risk for auto accidents. If you are driving and feel sleepy, pull over and take a break.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your current medications, drug use, and medical history. Usually, these are the only methods needed to diagnose insomnia. Treatment 
 
 Not getting 8 hours of sleep every night does not mean your health is at risk. Different people have different sleep needs. Some people do fine on 6 hours of sleep a night. Others only do well if they get 10 to 11 hours of sleep a night. Treatment often begins by reviewing any drugs or health problems that may be causing or worsen insomnia, such as: Enlarged prostate gland, causing men to wake up at night Pain or discomfort from muscle, joint, or nerve disorders  You should also think about lifestyle and sleep habits that may affect your sleep. This is called sleep hygiene. Making some  changes in your sleep habits  may improve or solve your insomnia. Some people may need  medicines to help with sleep  for a short period of time. But in the long run, making changes in your lifestyle and sleep habits is the best treatment for problems with falling and staying asleep. Most over-the-counter (OTC) sleeping pills contain antihistamines. These medicines are commonly used to treat allergies. Your body quickly becomes used to them. Sleep medicines called hypnotics can be prescribed by your provider to help reduce the time it takes you to fall asleep. Most of these can become habit-forming. Medicines used to treat anxiety or depression can also help with sleep Different methods of talk therapy may help you gain control over anxiety or depression. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people are able to sleep by practicing good sleep hygiene. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if insomnia has become a problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Sleep disorder - insomnia; Sleep issues; Difficulty falling asleep; Sleep hygiene - insomnia References 
 
 Chokdroverty S, Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 102. Morin CM, Benca R. Chronic insomnia.  Lancet.  2012;379(9821):1129-1141. PMID: 22265700  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22265700 .
 Schutte-Rodin S, Broch L, Buysse D, Dorsey C, Sateia M. Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults.  J Clin Sleep Med.  2008;4(5):487-504. PMID: 18853708  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18853708 .
 Vaughn BV. Disorders of sleep. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 405. Wakefield TL, Lam DJ, Ishman SL. Sleep apnea and sleep disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 18. 
 Review Date 2/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Insomnia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia