
 Intellectual disability 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intellectual disability is a condition diagnosed before age 18 that includes below-average intellectual function and a lack of skills necessary for daily living. In the past, the term mental retardation was used to describe this condition. This term is no longer used. Causes 
 
 Intellectual disability affects about 1 to 3% of the population. There are many causes of intellectual disability, but doctors find a specific reason in only 25% of cases. Risk factors are related to the causes. Causes of intellectual disability can include: Infections (present at birth or occurring after birth) Chromosomal abnormalities (such as Down syndrome) Environmental Metabolic (such as hyperbilirubinemia, very high bilirubin levels in babies) Nutritional (such as malnutrition) Toxic ( intrauterine  exposure to  alcohol , cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs Trauma (before and after birth) Unexplained (doctors do not know the reason for the person's intellectual disability)  Symptoms 
 
 As a family, you may suspect your child has an intellectual disability when your child has any of the following: Lack of or slow development of motor skills, language skills, and self-help skills, especially when compared to peers Failure to grow intellectually or continued infant-like behavior Lack of curiosity Problems keeping up in school Failure to adapt (adjust to new situations) Difficulty understanding and following social rules  Signs of intellectual disability can range from mild to severe. Exams and Tests 
 
 Developmental tests are often used to assess the child:  Abnormal Denver developmental screening test Adaptive Behavior score below average Development way below that of peers Intelligence quotient (IQ) score below 70 on a standardized IQ test  Treatment 
 
 Goal of treatment is to develop the person's potential to the fullest. Special education and training may begin as early as infancy. This includes social skills to help the person function as normally as possible. It is important for a specialist to evaluate the person for other physical and mental health problems. People with intellectual disability are often helped with behavioral counseling. Discuss your child's treatment and support options with your health care provider or social worker so that you can help your child reach his or her full potential. Support Groups 
 
 American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities --  www.aaidd.org The Arc --  www.thearc.org National Association for Down Syndrome --  www.nads.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on: Severity and cause of the intellectual disability Other conditions Treatment and therapies  Many people lead productive lives and learn to function on their own. Others need a structured environment to be most successful. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have any concerns about your child's development You notice that your child's motor or language skills are not developing normally Your child has other disorders that need treatment  Prevention 
 
 Genetic.  Genetic counseling and screening during pregnancy can help parents understand risks and make plans and decisions. Social.  Nutrition programs can reduce disability associated with malnutrition. Early intervention in situations involving abuse and poverty will also help. Toxic.  Preventing exposure to lead, mercury, and other toxins reduces the risk of disability. Teaching women about the risks of alcohol and drugs during pregnancy can also help reduce risk. Infectious diseases.  Certain infections can lead to intellectual disability. Preventing these diseases reduces the risk. For example, rubella syndrome can be prevented through vaccination. Avoiding exposure to cat feces that can cause toxoplasmosis during pregnancy helps reduce disability from this infection. Alternative Names 
 
 
 
Mental retardation References 
 
 Shapiro BK, Batshaw ML. Intellectual disability. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Adrenoleukodystrophy 
 Chromosome 
 Congenital cytomegalovirus 
 Congenital rubella 
 Congenital toxoplasmosis 
 Cri du chat syndrome 
 Diabetes 
 Encephalitis 
 Fragile X syndrome 
 Galactosemia 
 Genes 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Hunter syndrome 
 Hurler syndrome 
 Intrauterine 
 Lead poisoning 
 Listeriosis 
 Low blood sugar 
 Meningitis 
 Metachromatic leukodystrophy 
 Methylmercury poisoning 
 Phenylketonuria 
 Prader-Willi syndrome 
 Reye syndrome 
 Sanfilippo syndrome 
 Tay-Sachs disease 
 Toxicology screen 
 Tuberous sclerosis 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Developmental Disabilities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia