
 Intestinal obstruction repair 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intestinal obstruction repair is surgery to relieve a  bowel obstruction . A bowel obstruction occurs when the contents of the intestines cannot pass through and exit the body. A complete obstruction is a surgical emergency. Description 
 
 Intestinal obstruction repair is done while you are under  general anesthesia . This means you are asleep and DO NOT feel pain. The surgeon makes a cut in your belly to see your intestines. Sometimes, the surgery can be done using a laparoscope, which means smaller cuts are used.  The surgeon locates the area of your intestine (bowel) that is blocked and unblocks it. Any damaged parts of your bowel will be repaired or removed. This procedure is called  bowel resection . If a section is removed, the healthy ends will be reconnected with stitches or staples. Sometimes, when part of the intestine is removed, the ends cannot be reconnected. If this happens, the surgeon will bring one end out through an opening in the abdominal wall. This may be done using a  colostomy ,  ileostomy , or mucous fistula. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This procedure is done to relieve a blockage in your intestine. A blockage that lasts for a long time can reduce or block blood flow to the area. This can cause the bowel to die. Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general include: Reactions to medicines, breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots, infection  Risks of this procedure: Bowel obstruction after surgery Damage to nearby organs in the body Formation of scar tissue ( adhesions ) More scar tissue forming in your belly and causing a blockage of your intestines in the future Opening of the edges of your intestines that are sewn together (anastomotic leak), which may cause life-threatening problems Problems with colostomy or ileostomy Temporary  paralysis  (freezing up) of the bowel ( paralytic ileus )  After the Procedure 
 
 How long it takes to recover depends on your overall health and the type of operation. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is usually good if the obstruction is treated before bowel blood flow is affected. People who have had many abdominal surgeries may form scar tissue. They are more likely to have bowel obstructions in the future. Alternative Names 
 
 Repair of volvulus; Intestinal volvulus - repair; Bowel obstruction - repair Images 
 
 
 Intussusception - x-ray 
 Before and after small intestine anastomosis 
 Intestinal obstruction (pediatric) - series 
 Intestinal obstruction repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Boniface K. Bowel obstructions. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 40. Fry RD, Mahmoud NN, Maron DJ, Bleier JIS. Colon and rectum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 52. Mizell JS, Turnage RH. Intestinal obstruction. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 123. Read More 
 
 Abdomen - swollen 
 Adhesion 
 Colostomy 
 Cyst 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Intussusception - children 
 Large bowel resection 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bland diet 
 Changing your ostomy pouch 
 Ileostomy and your diet 
 Ileostomy - caring for your stoma 
 Ileostomy - changing your pouch 
 Ileostomy - discharge 
 Ileostomy - what to ask your doctor  
 Intestinal or bowel obstruction - discharge  
 Low-fiber diet 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Types of ileostomy 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Intestinal Obstruction 
 Browse the Encyclopedia