
 Interstitial nephritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Interstitial nephritis is a kidney disorder in which the spaces between the kidney tubules become swollen (inflamed). This can cause problems with the way your kidneys work. Causes 
 
 Interstitial nephritis may be temporary ( acute ), or it may be long-lasting ( chronic ) and get worse over time. The acute form of interstitial nephritis is most often caused by side effects of certain drugs. The following can cause interstitial nephritis: Allergic reaction  to a drug (acute interstitial allergic nephritis). Autoimmune disorders, such as antitubular basement membrane disease, Kawasaki disease, Sjögren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, or Wegener granulomatosis. Infections. Long-term use of medicines such as acetaminophen (Tylenol), aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). This is called  analgesic nephropathy . 
  Side effect of certain antibiotics (including penicillin, ampicillin, methicillin, sulfonamide medicines, and others). Side effect of other medicines such as furosemide, thiazide diuretics, omeprazole, triamterene, and allopurinol. Too little potassium in your blood. Too much calcium or uric acid in your blood. Symptoms 
 
 Interstitial nephritis can cause mild to severe kidney problems, including  acute kidney failure . In about half of cases, people will have  decreased urine output  and other signs of acute kidney failure. Symptoms of this condition may include: Blood in the urine Fever Increased or  decreased urine output Mental status changes  ( drowsiness ,  confusion ,  coma ) Nausea ,  vomiting Rash Swelling  of the body, any area Weight gain  (from retaining fluid) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may reveal: Abnormal lung or heart sounds High blood pressure Fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) Common tests include: Arterial blood gases Blood chemistry BUN  and blood  creatinine  levels Complete blood count Kidney biopsy Kidney ultrasound Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the problem. Avoiding medicines that lead to this condition may quickly relieve symptoms. Limiting salt and fluid in the diet can improve swelling and high blood pressure. Limiting  protein  in the diet can help control the buildup of waste products in the blood ( azotemia ) that can lead to symptoms of acute kidney failure. If dialysis is necessary, it usually is required for only a short time. Corticosteroids or stronger anti-inflammatory medicines such as cyclophosphamide can sometimes be helpful. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most often, interstitial nephritis is a short-term disorder. In rare cases, it can cause permanent damage, including chronic kidney failure. Acute interstitial nephritis may be more severe and more likely to lead to long-term or permanent  kidney damage  in older people. Possible Complications 
 
 Metabolic acidosis  can occur because the kidneys aren't able to remove enough acid. The disorder can lead to acute or  chronic kidney failure  or  end-stage kidney disease . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of interstitial nephritis. If you have interstitial nephritis, call your provider if you get new symptoms, especially if you are less alert or have a decrease in urine output. Prevention 
 
 Often, the disorder can't be prevented. Avoiding or reducing your use of medicines that can cause this condition can help reduce your risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Tubulointerstitial nephritis; Nephritis - interstitial; Acute interstitial (allergic) nephritis Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Arend LJ. Tubulointerstitial diseases. In: Lager DJ, Abrahams NA, eds.  Practical Renal Pathology . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 7. Nangaku M. Chronic interstitial nephritis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Allergic reactions 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Chronic 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Renal 
 Urine output - decreased 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia