
 Intestinal obstruction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intestinal obstruction is a partial or complete blockage of the bowel. The contents of the intestine cannot pass through it. Causes 
 
 Obstruction of the bowel may be due to: 
  A mechanical cause, which means something is in the way
   
  Ileus, a condition in which the bowel does not work correctly, but there is no structural problem causing it
   Paralytic ileus, also called pseudo-obstruction, is one of the major causes of intestinal obstruction in infants and children. Causes of paralytic ileus may include: Bacteria or viruses that cause intestinal infections ( gastroenteritis ) Chemical, electrolyte, or mineral imbalances (such as decreased potassium level) Abdominal surgery Decreased blood supply to the intestines Infections inside the abdomen, such as appendicitis Kidney or lung disease Use of certain medicines, especially narcotics  Mechanical causes of intestinal obstruction may include: Adhesions  or scar tissue that forms after surgery Foreign bodies (objects that are swallowed and block the intestines) Gallstones  (rare) Hernias Impacted stool Intussusception  (telescoping of 1 segment of bowel into another) Tumors  blocking the intestines Volvulus (twisted intestine)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal swelling (distention) Abdominal fullness, gas Abdominal pain  and cramping Breath odor Constipation Diarrhea Inability to pass gas Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider may find bloating, tenderness, or  hernias  in the abdomen.  Tests that show obstruction include: Abdominal  CT scan Abdominal x-ray Barium enema Upper GI and small bowel series Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves placing a tube through the nose into the stomach or intestine. This is to help relieve abdominal swelling (distention) and vomiting. Volvulus of the large bowel may be treated by passing a tube into the rectum. Surgery may be needed to relieve the obstruction if the tube does not relieve the symptoms. It may also be needed if there are signs of tissue death. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the cause of the blockage. Most of the time, the cause is successfully treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include or may lead to: Electrolyte (blood chemical and mineral)  imbalances Dehydration Hole (perforation) in the intestine Infection Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes)  If the obstruction blocks the blood supply to the intestine, it may cause infection and tissue death (gangrene). Risks for tissue death are related to the cause of the blockage and how long it has been present. Hernias, volvulus, and intussusception carry a higher gangrene risk.  In a newborn, paralytic ileus that destroys the bowel wall (necrotizing enterocolitis) is a life-threatening condition. It may lead to blood and lung infections. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you:  Cannot pass stool or gas Have a swollen abdomen (distention) that does not go away Keep vomiting Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the cause. Treating conditions, such as tumors and hernias that can lead to a blockage, may reduce your risk.  Some causes of obstruction cannot be prevented. Alternative Names 
 
 Paralytic ileus; Intestinal volvulus; Bowel obstruction; Ileus; Pseudo-obstruction - intestinal; Colonic ileus Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Ileus - x-ray of distended bowel and stomach 
 Ileus - x-ray of bowel distension 
 Intussusception - x-ray 
 Volvulus - x-ray 
 Small bowel obstruction - x-ray 
 Small bowel resection  - series 
 References 
 
 Fry RD, Mahmoud NN, Maron DJ, Bleier JIS. Colon and rectum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 52. McKenzie S, Evers BM. Small intestine. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 50. Mizell JS, Turnage RH. Intestinal obstruction. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 123. Read More 
 
 Abdomen - swollen 
 Abdominal sounds 
 Crohn disease 
 Gallstones 
 Hernia 
 Intestinal obstruction repair 
 Intussusception - children 
 Peritonitis 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diet - clear liquid 
 Diet - full liquid 
 Large bowel resection - discharge 
 Small bowel resection - discharge 
 Total colectomy or proctocolectomy - discharge 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adhesions 
 Intestinal Obstruction 
 Browse the Encyclopedia