
 Intercostal retractions 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intercostal retractions occur when the muscles between the ribs pull inward. The movement is most often a sign that the person has a breathing problem. Intercostal retractions are a medical emergency.  Considerations 
 
 The wall of your chest is flexible. This helps you breathe normally. Stiff tissue called cartilage attaches your ribs to the breast bone (sternum).  The intercostal muscles are the muscles between the ribs. During breathing, these muscles normally tighten and pull the rib cage up. Your chest expands and the lungs fill with air. Intercostal retractions are due to reduced air pressure inside your chest. This can happen if the upper airway (trachea) or small airways of the lungs (bronchioles) become partially blocked. As a result, the intercostal muscles are sucked inward, between the ribs, when you breathe. This is a sign of a  blocked airway . Any health problem that causes a blockage in the airway will cause intercostal retractions. Causes 
 
 Intercostal retractions may be caused by: A severe, whole-body allergic reaction called  anaphylaxis Asthma Swelling and mucus buildup in the smallest air passages in the lungs ( bronchiolitis ) Problem breathing and a barking cough ( croup ) Inflammation of the tissue ( epiglottis ) that covers the windpipe Foreign body in the windpipe Pneumonia A lung problem in newborns called  respiratory distress syndrome Collection of pus in the tissues in the back of the throat ( retropharyngeal abscess ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical help right away if intercostal retractions occur. This can be a sign of a blocked airway, which can quickly become life threatening. Also seek medical care if the skin, lips, or nailbeds turn blue, or if the person becomes  confused ,  drowsy , or is hard to wake up. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 In an emergency, the health care team will first take steps to help you breathe. You may receive oxygen, medicines to reduce swelling, and other treatments. When you can breathe better, the health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms, such as:  
  When did the problem start?
    
   Is it getting better, worse, or staying the same?
    
   Does it occur all the time?
    
   Did you notice anything significant that might have caused an airway obstruction?
    
  What other symptoms are there, such as blue skin color, wheezing, high-pitched sound when breathing, coughing or sore throat?
    
  Has anything been breathed into the airway?
    Tests that may be done include: Arterial blood gases Chest x-ray Complete blood count  (CBC) Pulse oximetry to measure blood oxygen level Alternative Names 
 
 Retractions of the chest muscles References 
 
 Roosevelt GE. Acute inflammatory upper airway obstruction (croup, epiglottitis, laryngitis, and bacterial tracheitis). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 385. Sarnaik AP, Clark JA, Sarnaik AA. Respiratory distress and failure. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 71. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia