
 Interstitial keratitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Interstitial keratitis is inflammation of the tissue of the cornea, the clear window on the front of the eye. The condition can lead to vision loss. Causes 
 
 Interstitial keratitis is a serious condition in which blood vessels grow into the cornea. Such growth can cause loss of the normal clearness of the cornea. This condition is often caused by infections. Syphilis is the most common cause of interstitial keratitis, but rare causes include: Autoimmune diseases, like  rheumatoid arthritis  and  sarcoidosis Leprosy Lyme disease Tuberculosis In the United States, most cases of syphilis are recognized and treated before this eye condition develops.  However, interstitial keratitis accounts for 10% of avoidable blindness in the least developed countries worldwide.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Eye pain Excessive tearing Sensitivity to light ( photophobia )  Exams and Tests 
 
 Interstitial keratitis can be easily diagnosed by  slit-lamp examination  of the eyes. Blood tests and  chest x-rays  will most often be needed to confirm the infection or disease that is causing the condition. Treatment 
 
 The underlying disease must be treated. Treating the cornea with corticosteroid drops may minimize scarring and help keep the cornea clear. Once the active inflammation has passed, the cornea is left severely scarred and with abnormal blood vessels. The only way to restore vision at this stage is with a cornea transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Diagnosing and treating interstitial keratitis and its cause early can preserve the clear cornea and good vision. Possible Complications 
 
 A corneal transplant is not as successful for interstitial keratitis as it is for most other corneal diseases. The presence of blood vessels in the diseased cornea brings white blood cells to the newly transplanted cornea and increases the risk of rejection. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 People with interstitial keratitis need to be followed closely by ophthalmologist and a medical specialist with knowledge of the underlying disease.  A person with the condition should be checked immediately if: Pain gets worse Redness increases Vision decreases This is particularly crucial for people with corneal transplants. Prevention 
 
 Prevention consists of avoiding the infection that causes interstitial keratitis. If you do get infected, get prompt and thorough treatment and follow-up. Alternative Names 
 
 Keratitis interstitial; Cornea - keratitis Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Ginsberg SP. Corneal problems in systemic disease. In: Duane TD, Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:chap 43. Lin A, Bouchard CS. Noninfectious keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.17. World Health Organization. Causes of blindness and visual impairment. Prevention of blindness and visual impairment.  www.who.int/blindness/causes/en . Accessed September 7, 2016. Read More 
 
 Corneal ulcers and infections 
 Leprosy 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Trachoma 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Corneal Disorders 
 Syphilis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia