
 Intravascular ultrasound  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) is a diagnostic test. This test uses sound waves to see inside blood vessels. It is useful for evaluating the coronary arteries that supply the heart.  Description 
 
 A tiny  ultrasound  wand is attached to the top of a thin tube. This tube is called a catheter. The catheter is inserted into an artery in your groin area and moved up to the heart. It is different from conventional Duplex ultrasound. Duplex ultrasound is done from the outside of your body by placing the transducer on the skin.  A computer measures how the sound waves reflect off blood vessels, and changes the sound waves into pictures. IVUS gives the health care provider a look at your coronary arteries from the inside-out. IVUS is almost always done during a procedure. Reasons why it may be done include:  Getting information about the heart or its blood vessels  or to find out if you need heart surgery Treating some types of heart conditions Angiography gives a general look at the coronary arteries. However, it can't show the walls of the arteries. IVUS images show the artery walls and can reveal cholesterol and fat deposits (plaques). Buildup of these deposits can increase your risk of a heart attack. IVUS has helped providers understand how  stents  become clogged. This is called stent restenosis. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 IVUS is commonly done to make sure a stent is correctly placed during angioplasty. It may also be done to determine where a stent should be placed. IVUS may also be used to: View the aorta and structure of the artery walls, which can show plaque buildup Find which blood vessel is involved in aortic dissection Risks 
 
 There is a slight risk of complications with angioplasty and cardiac catheterization. However, the tests are very safe when done by an experienced team. IVUS adds little additional risk. Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots Infection  Other risks include: Damage to a heart valve or blood vessel Heart attack Irregular heartbeat ( arrhythmia ) 
  Kidney failure (a higher risk in people who already have kidney problems or diabetes) Stroke  (this is rare) After the Procedure 
 
 After the test, the catheter is completely removed. A bandage is placed on the area. You will be asked to lie flat on your back with pressure on your groin area for a few hours after the test to prevent bleeding. If IVUS was done during: Cardiac catheterization: You will stay in the hospital for about 3 to 6 hours. Angioplasty: You will stay in the hospital for 12 to 24 hours.  The IVUS does not add to the time you must stay in the hospital. Alternative Names 
 
 IVUS; Ultrasound - coronary artery; Endovascular ultrasound; Intravascular echocardiography Images 
 
 
 Anterior heart arteries 
 Coronary artery blockage 
 Cardiac catheterization 
 References 
 
 American Heart Association. Cardiac catheterization. Updated September 2, 2015.  www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/HeartAttack/SymptomsDiagnosisofHeartAttack/Cardiac-Catheterization_UCM_451486_Article.jsp#.V34vl7h961s . Accessed July 7, 2016. León LR, Labropoulos N. Vascular laboratory: venous duplex scanning. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 18. Ziada KM. Intravascular ultrasound imaging. In: Bhatt DL, ed.  Cardiovascular Intervention: A Companion to Braunwald's Heart Disease . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Cardiac catheterization 
 Coronary heart disease 
 Stent 
 Ultrasound 
 
 Review Date 6/6/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, RPVI, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology and Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology and Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia