
 Intravenous pyelogram 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An intravenous pyelogram (IVP) is a special  x-ray  exam of the kidneys, bladder, and ureters (the tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder). How the Test is Performed 
 
 An IVP is done in a hospital radiology department or a health care provider's office.  You may be asked to take some medicine to clear your bowels before the procedure to provide a better view of the urinary tract. You will need to empty your bladder right before the procedure starts. Your provider will inject an iodine-based contrast (dye) into a vein in your arm. A series of x-ray images are taken at different times. This is to see how the kidneys remove the dye and how it collects in your urine. A compression device (a wide belt containing two balloons that can be inflated) may be used to keep the contrast material in the kidneys. You will need to lie still during the procedure. The test may take up to an hour. Before the final image is taken, you will be asked to urinate again. This is to see how well the bladder has emptied. You can go back to your normal diet and medicines after the procedure. You should drink plenty of fluids to help remove all the contrast dye from your body. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 As with all x-ray procedures, tell your provider if you: Are allergic to contrast material Are pregnant Have any drug allergies Have any kidney disease  Your provider will tell you if you can eat or drink before this test. You may be given a laxative to take the afternoon before the procedure to clear the intestines. This will help your kidneys to be seen clearly. You must sign a consent form. You will be asked to wear a hospital gown and to remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a burning or  flushing  sensation in your arm and body as the contrast dye is injected. You may also have a metallic taste in your mouth. This is normal and will go away quickly. Some people develop a headache, nausea, or vomiting after the dye is injected. The belt across the kidneys may feel tight over your belly area. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 An IVP can be used to evaluate: An abdominal injury Bladder and kidney infections Blood in the urine Flank pain  (possibly due to  kidney stones ) Tumors  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The test may reveal kidney diseases, birth defects of the urinary system, tumors, kidney stones, or damage to the urinary system. Risks 
 
 There is a chance of an  allergic reaction  to the dye, even if you have received contrast dye in the past without any problem. If you have a known allergy to iodine-based contrast, a different test can be done. Other tests include retrograde pyelography, MRI, or ultrasound. There is low radiation exposure. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Children are more sensitive to the risks of radiation. This test is not likely to be done during pregnancy.  Considerations 
 
 Computed tomography (CT) scans have replaced IVP as the main tool for checking the urinary system. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is also used to look at the kidneys, ureters, and bladder. Alternative Names 
 
 Excretory urography; IVP Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 Intravenous pyelogram 
 References 
 
 Fulgham PF, Bishoff JT. Urinary tract imaging: Basic principles. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Acute arterial occlusion - kidney 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 Bilateral hydronephrosis 
 Cystinuria 
 Enlarged prostate 
 Flank pain 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Kidney stones 
 Medullary cystic kidney disease 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Prostate cancer 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 Renal pelvis or ureter cancer 
 Renovascular hypertension 
 Retroperitoneal fibrosis 
 Ureterocele 
 Urine - bloody  
 Wilms tumor 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Kidney Stones 
 Kidney Tests 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia