
 Intussusception - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intussusception is the sliding of one part of the intestine into another. This article focuses on intussusception in children. Causes 
 
 Intussusception is caused by part of the intestine being pulled inward into itself.  The pressure created by the walls of the intestine pressing together causes: Decreased blood flow Irritation Swelling  Intussusception can block the passage of food through the intestine. If the blood supply is cut off, the segment of intestine pulled inside can die. Heavy bleeding may also occur. If a hole develops, infection,  shock , and  dehydration  can take place very rapidly. The cause of intussusception is not known. Conditions that may lead to the problem include: Viral infection Englarged lymph node in the intestine Polyp or tumor  The reason for the problem is more likely to be found in older children. Intussusception can affect both children and adults. However, most cases occur in children ages 6 months to 2 years. It affects boys four times as often as girls. Symptoms 
 
 The first sign of intussusception is very often sudden, loud crying caused by  abdominal pain . The pain is colicky and not continuous (intermittent), but it comes back often. The pain will get stronger and last longer each time it returns.  An infant with severe abdominal pain may draw the knees to the chest while crying. Other symptoms include: Bloody, mucus-like bowel movement, sometimes called a "currant jelly" stool Fever Shock ( pale  color,  lethargy , sweating) Stool mixed with blood and mucus Vomiting  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will perform a thorough exam, which may reveal a  mass in the abdomen . There may also be signs of dehydration or shock. Tests may include: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal x-ray Air or contrast  enema Treatment 
 
 The child will first be stabilized. A tube will be passed into the stomach through the nose (nasogastric tube). An intravenous (IV) line will be placed in the arm, and fluids will be given to prevent dehydration. In some cases, the  bowel blockage  can be treated with an air or contrast enema. This is done by a radiologist skilled with the procedure. There is a risk of bowel tearing (perforation) with this procedure.  The child will need surgery if these treatments do not work. The bowel tissue can very often be saved. Dead tissue will be removed. Antibiotics may be needed to treat any infection. Intravenous  feeding and fluids will be continued until the child has a normal bowel movement. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is good with early treatment. There is a risk this problem will come back. When a hole or tear in the bowel occurs, it must be treated right away. If not treated, intussusception is almost always fatal for infants and young children. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Intussusception is an emergency. Call your doctor right away, then call 911 or go to the emergency room right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal pain in children - intussusception Images 
 
 
 Colonoscopy 
 Intussusception - x-ray 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Hostetler MA. Gastrointestinal disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 172. Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF. Ileus, adhesions, intussusception, and closed-loop obstructions. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Dehydration 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Intestinal Obstruction 
 Toddler Health 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia