
 Iodine poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Iodine is a naturally occurring chemical. Small amounts are needed for good health. However, large doses can cause harm. Children are especially sensitive to the effects of iodine. NOTE: Iodine is found in certain foods. However, there is normally not enough iodine in foods to harm the body. This article focusses on poisoning from exposure to non-food items that contain iodine. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Iodine Where Found 
 
 Iodine is found in: Amiodarone (Cordarone) Chemicals (catalysts) for photography and engraving Dyes and inks Lugol's solution Pima syrup Potassium iodide Radioactive iodine used for certain medical tests or the treatment of thyroid disease Tincture of iodine  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of iodine poisoning include: Abdominal pain Coughing Delirium Diarrhea , sometimes bloody Fever Gum and tooth soreness Loss of appetite Metallic taste  in mouth Mouth and throat pain and burning No urine output Rash Salivation (producing saliva) Seizures Shock Shortness of breath Stupor  (decreased level of alertness) Thirst Vomiting Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Give the person milk, or cornstarch or flour mixed with water. Continue to give milk every 15 minutes. DO NOT give these items if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful to emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Esophageal stricture  (narrowing of the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach) is a possible complication. Long-term effects of iodine overdose include thyroid gland problems. References 
 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). 2004. Toxicological Profile for iodine. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Perez A, McKay C. Halogens. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 96. 
 Review Date 1/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia