
 Isolated sleep paralysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Isolated sleep paralysis is a type of  paralysis  that occurs when a person just goes to sleep or upon waking from sleep.  It is not associated with another sleep disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Episodes of isolated sleep paralysis last from a few seconds to 1 or 2 minutes. During these episodes the person is unable to move or speak. Breathing is not affected. These spells end on their own or when the person is touched or moved. In rare cases, the person may have dream-like sensations or  hallucinations , which may be scary to them. Exams and Tests 
 
 Sleep paralysis can be a symptom of  narcolepsy . But if you do not have other symptoms of narcolepsy, there is usually no need to have  sleep studies  done. Treatment 
 
 
 
In most cases, isolated sleep paralysis occurs so rarely that treatment is not needed. If the cause is known, for example due to lack of sleep, correcting the cause, such as getting enough sleep, often resolves the condition. In persons with mental health conditions, medicine and behavioral therapy (talk therapy) to help treat the mental condition may resolve sleep paralysis. Alternative Names 
 
 Sleep paralysis - isolated; Parasomnia - isolated sleep paralysis Images 
 
 
 Sleep patterns in the young and aged 
 References 
 
 Schenck CH, Mahowald MW. REM sleep parasomnias in adults. In: Barkoukis TJ, Matheson JK, Ferber R, Doghramji K, eds.  Therapy in Sleep Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Muscle function loss 
 Narcolepsy 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutger's New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia