
 Itching 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Itching is a tingling or irritation of the skin that makes you want to scratch the area. Itching may occur all over the body or only in one location. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of itching, including: Aging skin Atopic dermatitis  (eczema) Contact dermatitis  (poison ivy or poison oak) Contact irritants (such as soaps, chemicals, or wool) Dry skin Hives Insect bites and stings Parasites such as  pinworm ,  body lice ,  head lice , and  pubic lice Pityriasis rosea Psoriasis Rashes  (may or may not itch) Seborrheic dermatitis Sunburn Superficial skin infections such as  folliculitis  and  impetigo Generalized itching may be caused by: Allergic reactions Childhood infections (such as chickenpox or  measles ) Hepatitis Iron deficiency anemia Kidney disease Liver disease with jaundice Pregnancy Reactions to medicines and substances such as antibiotics (penicillin, sulfonamides), gold, griseofulvin, isoniazid, opiates, phenothiazines, or  vitamin A Home Care 
 
 For itching that does not go away or is severe, see your health care provider. In the meantime, you can take steps to help deal with the itch: Do not scratch or rub the itchy areas. Keep fingernails short to avoid damaging the skin from scratching. Family members or friends may be able to help by calling attention to your scratching. Wear cool, light, loose bedclothes. Avoid wearing rough clothing, such as wool, over an itchy area. Take lukewarm baths using little soap and rinse thoroughly. Try a skin-soothing oatmeal or cornstarch bath. Apply a soothing lotion after bathing to soften and cool the skin. Use moisturizer on the skin, especially in the dry winter months. Dry skin is a common cause of itching. Apply cold compresses to an itchy area. Avoid prolonged exposure to excessive heat and humidity. Do activities that distract you from the itching during the day and make you tired enough to sleep at night. Try over-the-counter oral antihistamines such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl). Be aware of possible side effects such as drowsiness. Try over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream on itchy areas.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have itching that:  Is severe Does not go away Cannot be easily explained  Also call if you have other, unexplained symptoms. With most itching, you do not need to see a provider. Look for an obvious cause of itching at home. It is sometimes easy for a parent to find the cause of a child's itching. Looking closely at the skin will help you identify any bites, stings, rashes, dry skin, or irritation. Have the itching checked out as soon as possible if it keeps returning and does not have a clear cause, you have itching all over your body, or you have hives that keep returning. Unexplained itching may be a symptom of a disease that could be serious. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you. You'll also be asked about the itching. Questions may include when it began, how long it has lasted, and whether you have it all the time or only at certain times. You may also be asked about medicines you take, whether you have allergies, or if you have been ill recently. Alternative Names 
 
 Pruritus Images 
 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Head lice 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Garg A, Bernhard JD. Pruritus. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 198. Raftery AT, Lim E, Ostor AJK. Pruritus. In: Raftery AT, Lim E, Ostor AJK, eds.  Churchill's Pocketbook of Differential Diagnosis . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:388-390. Read More 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Body lice 
 Chickenpox 
 Contact dermatitis 
 Head lice 
 Hives 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Pubic lice 
 Sunburn 
 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Itching 
 Browse the Encyclopedia