
 Jack-in-the-pulpit poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A Jack-in-the-pulpit is a plant belonging to the species  Arisaema triphyllum . This article describes poisoning caused by eating parts of this plant. The roots are the most dangerous part of the plant. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredient is: 
Calcium oxalate
   Where Found 
 
 Jack-in-the-pulpit plants are found in North America in wetlands and moist, wooded areas. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Burning in mouth and throat Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting Slurred speech Swelling of mouth and tongue Teary eyes  Blistering and swelling in the mouth may be severe enough to prevent normal speaking and swallowing. Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. Wipe out the mouth with a cold, wet cloth. Immediately give the person milk to drink, unless instructed otherwise by a provider. DO NOT give milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. Wash the skin with water. If the plant material touched the eyes, rinse the eyes with water. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the plant, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Wearing gloves, place the plant in a container and take it with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If contact with the person's mouth is not severe, symptoms most often clear up within a few days. For people who do have severe contact with the plant, a longer recovery time may be necessary. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 Arisaema triphyllum  poisoning; Bog onion poisoning; Brown dragon poisoning; Indian turnip poisoning; Wake robin poisoning; Wild turnip poisoning References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. Shofner JD, Kimball AB. Plant-induced dermatitis. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 63. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia