
 Jaundice 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Jaundice is a yellow color of the skin, mucus membranes, or eyes. The yellow coloring comes from bilirubin, a byproduct of old red blood cells. Jaundice can be a symptom of other health problems. Causes 
 
 A small number of red blood cells in your body die each day, and are replaced by new ones. The liver removes the old blood cells. This creates bilirubin. The liver helps break down bilirubin so that it can be removed by the body through the stool. Jaundice can occur when too much bilirubin builds up in the body. Jaundice can occur if: Too many red blood cells are dying or breaking down and going to the liver The liver is overloaded or damaged The bilirubin from the liver is unable to properly move into the digestive tract  Jaundice is often a sign of a problem with the liver, gallbladder, or pancreas. Things that can cause jaundice include: Infections Use of certain drugs Cancer Blood disorders, gallstones, birth defects and a number of other medical conditions can lead to jaundice. For more information on the causes of jaundice see:  Jaundice causes Symptoms 
 
 Jaundice may appear suddenly or develop slowly over time. Symptoms of jaundice commonly include: Yellow skin and the white part of the eyes (sclera) -- when jaundice is more severe, these areas may look brown Yellow color inside the mouth Dark or brown-colored urine Pale or clay-colored stools  Note: If the whites of your eyes are not yellow, you may not have jaundice. Your skin can turn a yellow-to-orange color if you eat a lot of beta carotene, the orange pigment in carrots. Other symptoms depend on the disorder causing the jaundice: Cancers may produce no symptoms, or there may be fatigue, weight loss, or other symptoms Hepatitis may produce nausea, vomiting, fatigue, or other symptoms Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show liver swelling. A  bilirubin blood test  will be done. Other tests may include: Hepatitis virus panel  to look for infection of the liver Liver function tests  to determine how well the liver is working Complete blood count  to check for low blood count or anemia Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram ( PTCA ) Liver biopsy Cholesterol level Prothrombin time Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the jaundice. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you develop symptoms of jaundice. Alternative Names 
 
 Conditions associated with jaundice; Yellow skin and eyes; Skin - yellow; Icterus; Eyes - yellow Images 
 
 
 Jaundice 
 Jaundiced infant 
 Cirrhosis of the liver 
 Exchange transfusion - series 
 References 
 
 Berk P, Korenblat K. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver tests In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 147. Wheatley MA, Heilpern KL. Jaundice In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 28.  Read More 
 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Bile 
 Bile duct stricture 
 Biliary atresia 
 Bilirubin blood test 
 Cholestasis 
 Delta agent (Hepatitis D) 
 Dubin-Johnson syndrome 
 Gallstones 
 Gilbert disease 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Hepatitis A 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 Malaria 
 Newborn jaundice 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia