
 Jimsonweed poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Jimsonweed is a tall herb plant. Jimsonweed poisoning occurs when someone sucks the juice or eats the seeds from this plant. You can also be poisoned by drinking tea made from the leaves. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: Atropine Hyoscine (scopolamine) Hyoscyamine Tropane alkaloids  Note:  This list may not include all poisonous ingredients. Where Found 
 
 The poison is found in all parts of the plant, especially the leaves and seeds. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of jimsonweed poisonings can affect various body systems. BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Little to no urine production (urine retention) Abdominal pain (from urine retention) EYES, EARS, NOSE, THROAT, AND MOUTH Blurred vision Dilated pupils Dry mouth STOMACH AND INTESTINES Nausea and vomiting HEART AND BLOOD Elevated blood pressure Rapid pulse NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma Convulsions Death Delirium Dizziness Hallucinations Headache SKIN Red skin Hot, dry skin WHOLE BODY Fever Thirst Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the plant, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids by IV (through the vein) Laxatives Medicines to treat symptoms, including an antidote to the effects of the poison Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 Angel's trumpet; Devil's weed; Thorn apple; Tolguacha; Jamestown weed; Stinkweed; Datura; Moonflower References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia