
 Joint x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This test is an x-ray of a knee, shoulder, hip, wrist, ankle, or other joint. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in the health care provider's office. The x-ray technologist will help you position the joint to be x-rayed on the table. Once in place, pictures are taken. The joint may be moved into other positions for more images. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the health care provider if you are pregnant. Remove all jewelry before the x-ray. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The  x-ray  is painless. It may be uncomfortable to move the joint into different positions. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The x-ray is used to detect  fractures , tumors, or degenerative conditions of the joint. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The x-ray may show: Arthritis Fractures Bone tumors Degenerative bone conditions Osteomyelitis  (inflammation of the bone caused by an infection) The test may also be performed to find out more about the following conditions: Acute gouty arthritis (gout) Adult-Onset Still's disease Caplan syndrome Chondromalacia patellae Chronic gouty arthritis Congenital dislocation of the hip Fungal arthritis Non-gonococcal (septic) bacterial arthritis Osteoarthritis Pseudogout Psoriatic arthritis Reiter syndrome Rheumatoid arthritis Runner's knee Tuberculous arthritis  Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-ray machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - joint; Arthrography; Arthrogram References 
 
 Bearcroft PWP, Hopper MA. Imaging techniques and fundamental observations for the musculoskeletal system. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 45. Mettler FA. Skeletal system. In: Mettler FA, ed.  Essentials of Radiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 8. Read More 
 
 Adult Still's disease 
 Anterior knee pain 
 Arthritis 
 Bone tumor 
 Broken bone 
 Calcium pyrophosphate arthritis 
 Caplan syndrome 
 Developmental dysplasia of the hip 
 Fungal arthritis 
 Gout 
 Osteoarthritis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Psoriatic arthritis 
 Reactive arthritis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Septic arthritis 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Bone Cancer 
 Bone Diseases 
 Fractures 
 Joint Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia