
 Karyotyping 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Karyotyping is a test to examine chromosomes in a sample of cells. This test can help identify genetic problems as the cause of a disorder or disease.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test can be performed on almost any tissue, including: Amniotic fluid Blood Bone marrow Tissue from the organ that develops during pregnancy to feed a growing baby (placenta)  To test amniotic fluid, an  amniocentesis  is done. A  bone marrow biopsy  is needed to take a sample of bone marrow.  The sample is placed into a special dish or tube and allowed to grow in the laboratory. Cells are later taken from the new sample and stained. The laboratory specialist uses a microscope to examine the size, shape, and number of chromosomes in the cell sample. The stained sample is photographed to show the arrangement of the chromosomes. This is called a karyotype.  Certain problems can be identified through the number or arrangement of the chromosomes. Chromosomes contain thousands of genes that are stored in DNA, the basic genetic material. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Follow the health care provider's instructions on how to prepare for the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 How the test will feel depends on whether the sample procedure is having blood drawn ( venipuncture ), amniocentesis, or bone marrow biopsy. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test can: Count the number of chromosomes Look for structural changes in chromosomes  This test may be done: On a couple that has a history of miscarriage To examine any child or baby who has unusual features or developmental delays  The bone marrow or blood test can be done to identify the Philadelphia chromosome, which is found in 85% of people with  chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) . The amniotic fluid test is done to check a developing baby for chromosome problems. Your provider may order other tests that go together with a karyotype: Microarray: Looks at small changes in the chromosomes Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH): Looks for small mistakes such as deletions in the chromosomes  Normal Results 
 
 Normal results are: Females: 44 autosomes and 2 sex chromosomes (XX), written as 46, XX Males: 44 autosomes and 2 sex chromosomes (XY), written as 46, XY  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to a genetic syndrome or condition, such as: Down syndrome Klinefelter syndrome Philadelphia chromosome Trisomy 18 Turner syndrome Chemotherapy may cause chromosome breaks that affect normal karyotyping results. Risks 
 
 Risks are related to the procedure used to obtain the sample.  In some cases, a problem may occur to the cells growing in the lab dish. Karyotype tests should be repeated to confirm that an abnormal chromosome problem is actually in the body of the person. Alternative Names 
 
 Chromosome analysis Images 
 
 
 Karyotyping 
 References 
 
 Bacino CA, Lee B. Cytogenetics. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 81. Stein CK. Applications of cytogenetics in modern pathology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 69. Read More 
 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
 Klinefelter syndrome 
 Turner syndrome 
 
 Review Date 10/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Down Syndrome 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Genetic Testing 
 Klinefelter's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia