
 Kidney stones 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A kidney stone is a solid mass made up of tiny crystals. One or more stones can be in the kidney or ureter at the same time. Causes 
 
 Watch this video about: Kidney stones Kidney stones are common. Some types run in families. They often occur in premature infants. There are different types of kidney stones. The cause of the problem depends on the type of stone. Stones can form when urine contains too much of certain substances that form crystals. These crystals can develop into stones over weeks or months.  Calcium stones are most common. They are most likely to occur in men between ages 20 to 30. Calcium can combine with other substances to form the stone. Oxalate is the most common of these. Oxalate is present in certain foods such as spinach. It is also found in vitamin C supplements. Diseases of the small intestine increase your risk of these stones.  Calcium stones can also form from combining with phosphate or carbonate.  Other types of stones include: Cystine stones can form in people who have  cystinuria . This disorder runs in families. It affects both men and women. Struvite stones are mostly found in women who have a urinary tract infection. These stones can grow very large and can block the kidney, ureter, or bladder. Uric acid stones are more common in men than in women. They can occur with gout or chemotherapy. Other substances such as certain medicines also can form stones.  The biggest risk factor for kidney stones is not drinking enough fluids. Kidney stones are more likely to occur if you make less than 1 liter (32 ounces) of urine a day.  Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms until the stones move down the tubes (ureters) through which urine empties into your bladder. When this happens, the stones can block the flow of urine out of the kidneys. The main symptom is severe pain that starts and stops suddenly: Pain may be felt in the belly area or side of the back. Pain may move to groin area ( groin pain ) or testicles ( testicle pain ).  Other symptoms can include: Abnormal urine color Blood in the urine Chills Fever Nausea and vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. The belly area (abdomen) or back might feel sore. Tests that may be done include: Blood tests to check calcium, phosphorus, uric acid, and electrolyte levels Kidney function tests Urinalysis  to see crystals and look for  red blood cells in urine Examination of the stone to determine the type  Stones or a blockage can be seen on: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal/kidney MRI Abdominal x-rays Intravenous pyelogram  ( IVP ) Kidney ultrasound Retrograde pyelogram  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the type of stone and the severity of your symptoms. Kidney stones that are small most often pass through your system on their own.  Your urine should be strained so the stone can be saved and tested. Drink at least 6 to 8 glasses of water per day to produce a large amount of urine. This will help the  stone pass . Pain can be very bad. Over-the-counter pain medicines (for example, ibuprofen and naproxen), either alone or along with narcotics, can be very effective.  Some people with severe pain from kidney stones need to stay in the hospital. You may need to get fluids through a vein. For some types of stones, your provider may prescribe medicine to prevent stones from forming or help break down and remove the material that is causing the stone. These medicines can include: Allopurinol (for  uric acid  stones) Antibiotics (for struvite stones) Diuretics (water pills) Phosphate solutions Sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate Water pills (thiazide diuretics) Tamsulosin to relax the ureter and help the stone pass  Surgery is often needed if: The stone is too large to pass on its own The stone is growing The stone is blocking urine flow and causing an infection or kidney damage The pain cannot be controlled  Today, most treatments are much less invasive than in the past. Lithotripsy  is used to remove stones slightly smaller than a half an inch (1.25 centimeters) that are located in the kidney or ureter. It uses sound or shock waves to break up stones. Then, the stone fragments leave the body in the urine. It is also called extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy or ESWL. Procedures performed by  passing a special instrument  through a small surgical cut in your skin and into your kidney or ureters are used for large stones, or when the kidneys or surrounding areas are incorrectly formed. The stone is removed with a tube (endoscope). Ureteroscopy may be used for stones in the lower urinary tract. Rarely, open surgery (nephrolithotomy) may be needed if other methods do not work or are not possible.  Talk to your provider  about what treatment options may work for you. You will need to take  self-care steps.  Which steps you take depend on the type of stone you have, but they may include: Drinking extra water and other liquids Eating more of some foods and cutting back on other foods Taking medicines to help prevent stones Taking medicines to help you pass a stone (anti-inflammatory drugs, alpha-blockers) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Kidney stones are painful but most of the time can be removed from the body without causing lasting damage. Kidney stones often come back. This occurs more often if the cause is not found and treated.  You are at risk for:  Urinary tract infection Kidney damage or scarring if treatment is delayed for too long  Possible Complications 
 
 Complication of kidney stones may include the obstruction of the ureter (acute unilateral obstructive uropathy). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of a kidney stone: Severe pain in your back or side that will not go away Blood in your urine Fever and chills Vomiting Urine that smells bad or looks cloudy A burning feeling when you urinate  If you have been diagnosed with blockage from a stone, passage must be confirmed either by capture in a strainer during urination or by follow-up x-ray.  Prevention 
 
 If you have a history of stones: Drink plenty of fluids (6 to 8 glasses of water per day) to produce enough urine. You may need to take medicine or make changes to your diet for some types of stones. Your provider may want to do blood and urine tests to help determine the proper prevention steps.  Alternative Names 
 
 Renal calculi; Nephrolithiasis; Stones - kidney; Calcium oxalate - stones; Cystine - stones; Struvite - stones; Uric acid - stones; Urinary lithiasis Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 Nephrolithiasis 
 Intravenous pyelogram (IVP) 
 Lithotripsy procedure 
 References 
 
 Bushinsky DA. Nephrolithiasis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 126. Fink HA, Wilt TJ, Eidman KE, et al. Medical management to prevent recurrent nephrolithiasis in adults: a systematic review for an American College of Physicians Clinical Guideline.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;158(7):535-543. PMID: 23546565  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23546565 . Fink HA, Wilt TJ, Eidman KE, et al. Recurrent nephrolithiasis in adults: comparative effectiveness of preventive medical strategies [Internet]. Rockville, MD.  Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US) 2012 ; Report No.: 12-EHC049-EF. PMID: 22896859  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22896859 . Lipkin ME, Ferrandino MN, Preminger Glenn M. Evaluation and medical management of urinary lithiasis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 52. Qaseem A, Dallas P, Forciea MA, Starkey M, Denberg TD; Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Dietary and pharmacologic management to prevent recurrent nephrolithiasis in adults: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Ann Intern Med . 2014;161(9):659-667. PMID: 25364887  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25364887 . Read More 
 
 Chemotherapy 
 Cystinuria 
 Gout 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 Overweight 
 Percutaneous urinary procedures 
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis 
 Renal 
 Uric acid  - blood  
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Hypercalcemia - discharge 
 Kidney stones and lithotripsy - discharge 
 Kidney stones - self-care 
 Kidney stones - what to ask your doctor 
 Percutaneous urinary procedures - discharge 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Stones 
 Browse the Encyclopedia