
 Klinefelter syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Klinefelter syndrome is a genetic condition that occurs in males when they have an extra X chromosome. Causes 
 
 Most people have 46 chromosomes. Chromosomes contain all of your genes and DNA, the building blocks of the body. The 2 sex chromosomes (X and Y) determine if you become a boy or a girl. Girls normally have 2 X chromosomes. Boys normally have 1 X and 1 Y chromosome. Klinefelter syndrome results when a boy is born with at least 1 extra X chromosome. Usually, this occurs due to 1 extra X. This is written as XXY. Klinefelter syndrome occurs in about 1 out of 500 to 1,000 baby boys. Women who get pregnant after age 35 are slightly more likely to have a boy with this syndrome than younger women. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Abnormal body proportions (long legs, short trunk, shoulder equal to hip size) Abnormally large breasts ( gynecomastia ) Infertility Sexual problems Less than normal amount of pubic, armpit, and facial hair Small, firm  testicles Tall height  Exams and Tests 
 
 Klinefelter syndrome may first be diagnosed when a man comes to the doctor because of  infertility . Infertility is the most common symptom. The following tests may be performed: Karyotyping  (checks the chromosomes) Semen count Blood tests will be done to check hormone levels including: Estradiol, a type of estrogen Follicle stimulating hormone Luteinizing hormone Testosterone Treatment 
 
 Testosterone therapy may be prescribed. This can help: Grow body hair Improve appearance of muscles Improve concentration Improve mood and self esteem Increase energy and sex drive Increase strength  Most men with this syndrome are not able to get a woman pregnant. But, an infertility specialist may be able to help. Seeing a doctor called an endocrinologist may also be helpful. Support Groups 
 
 These groups can provide more information: The American Association for Klinefelter Syndrome Information and Support (AAKSIS) --  www.aaksis.org National Institute of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute --  www.genome.gov/19519068 Possible Complications 
 
 Enlarged teeth with a thinning surface is very common in Klinefelter syndrome. This is called taurodontism. This can be seen on dental x-rays. Klinefelter syndrome also increases the risk of: Attention deficient hyperactivity disorder Autoimmune disorders, such as  lupus ,  rheumatoid arthritis , and  Sjogren syndrome Breast cancer  in men Depression Learning disabilities, including dyslexia, which affects reading A rare type of tumor called an extragonadal germ cell tumor Lung disease Osteoporosis Varicose veins When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if your son does not develop secondary sexual characteristics at puberty. This includes facial hair growth and a deepening of the voice. A genetics counselor can provide information about this condition and direct you to support groups in your area. Alternative Names 
 
 47 X-X-Y syndrome; XXY syndrome; XXY trisomy; 47,XXY/46,XY; Mosaic syndrome; Poly-X Klinefelter syndrome References 
 
 Bacino CA. Cytogenetics. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme J III, Schor N, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 76. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 Lung disease 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Varicose veins 
 
 Review Date 11/26/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Winston-Salem, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Klinefelter's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia