
 Knee MRI scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A knee MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan uses energy from strong magnets to create pictures of the knee joint and muscles and tissues. An MRI does not use radiation (x-rays). Single MRI images are called slices. The images can be stored on a computer or printed on film. One exam produces many images. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will wear a hospital gown or clothes without metal zippers or snaps (such as sweatpants and a t-shirt). Please remove your watches, jewelry, and wallet. Certain types of metal can cause blurry images. You will lie on a narrow table that slides into a large tunnel-like scanner. Some exams use a special dye (contrast). Most of the time, you will get the dye through a vein (IV) in your arm or hand before the test. Sometimes, the dye is given into a joint. The dye helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. During the MRI, the person who operates the machine will watch you from another room. The test most often lasts 30 to 60 minutes, but may take longer. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the scan. Tell your health care provider if you are afraid of closed spaces (have claustrophobia). You may be given a medicine to help you feel sleepy and less anxious. Your provider may suggest an "open" MRI, in which the machine is not as close to the body. Before the test, tell your provider if you have: Brain aneurysm clips Certain types of artificial heart valves Heart defibrillator or pacemaker Inner ear (cochlear) implants Kidney disease or dialysis (you may not be able to receive contrast) Recently placed artificial joints Certain types of vascular  stents Worked with sheet metal in the past (you may need tests to check for metal pieces in your eyes)  Because the MRI contains strong magnets, metal objects are not allowed into the room with the MRI scanner: Pens, pocketknives, and eyeglasses may fly across the room. Items such as jewelry, watches, credit cards, and hearing aids can be damaged. Pins, hairpins, metal zippers, and similar metallic items can distort the images. Removable dental work should be taken out just before the scan.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 An MRI exam causes no pain. You will need to lie still. Too much movement can blur MRI images and cause errors. The table may be hard or cold, but you can ask for a blanket or pillow. The machine makes loud thumping and humming noises when turned on. You can wear ear plugs to help block out the noise. An intercom in the room allows you to speak to someone at any time. Some MRIs have televisions and special headphones to help the time pass. There is no recovery time, unless you were given a medicine to relax. After an MRI scan, you can return to your normal diet, activity, and medicines. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have: An abnormal result on a knee x-ray or bone scan A feeling that your knee is giving away in the knee joint Buildup of joint fluid behind the knee ( Baker cyst ) Fluid collecting in the knee joint Infection of the knee joint Knee cap injury Knee pain with fever Knee locking when you walk or moving Signs of damage to the knee muscle, cartilage, or ligaments Knee pain  that does not get better with treatment  You may also have this test to check your progress after knee surgery. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means your knee looks okay. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to a sprain or tear of the ligaments in the knee area. Abnormal results may also be due to: Arthritis of the knee Avascular necrosis  (also called osteonecrosis) Bone tumor or cancer Broken bone Buildup of joint fluid behind the knee ( Baker cyst ) Infection in the bone (osteomyelitis) Inflammation Injury of the knee cap  Talk to your provider if you have questions or concerns. Risks 
 
 MRI contains no radiation. There have been no reported side effects from the magnetic fields and radio waves. The most common type of contrast (dye) used is gadolinium. It is very safe. Allergic reactions to the substance are rare. However, gadolinium can be harmful to people with kidney problems that need dialysis. If you have kidney problems, please tell your health care provider before the test. The strong magnetic fields created during an MRI can cause heart pacemakers and other implants to not work as well. It can also cause small pieces of metal inside your body to move or shift. For safety reasons, please do not bring anything that contains metal into the scanner room. Considerations 
 
 Tests that may be done instead of a knee MRI include: CT scan of the knee Knee x-ray Alternative Names 
 
 MRI - knee References 
 
 Chalmers PN, Chalal J, Bach BR. Knee diagnosis and decision making. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 92. Thomsen HS, Reimer P. Intravascular contrast media for radiology, CT, and MRI In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 2. Wilkinson ID, Graves MJ.. Magnetic resonance imaging: In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 5. Read More 
 
 ACL reconstruction 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 ACL reconstruction - discharge  
 Review Date 3/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Knee Injuries and Disorders 
 MRI Scans 
 Browse the Encyclopedia