
 Kwashiorkor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Kwashiorkor is a form of  malnutrition  that occurs when there is not enough  protein  in the diet. Causes 
 
 Kwashiorkor is most common in areas where there is: Famine Limited food supply Low levels of education (when people do not understand how to eat a proper diet)  This disease is more common in very poor countries. It often occurs during a drought or other natural disaster, or during political unrest. These conditions are responsible for a lack of food, which leads to malnutrition. Kwashiorkor is very rare in children in the United States. There are only isolated cases. However, one government estimate suggests that as many as 50% of elderly people in nursing homes in the United States do not get enough protein in their diet. When kwashiorkor does occur in the United States, it is most often a sign of  child abuse  and severe neglect. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Changes in  skin pigment Decreased muscle mass Diarrhea Failure to gain weight and grow Fatigue Hair changes (change in color or texture) Increased and more severe infections due to damaged immune system Irritability Large belly that sticks out (protrudes) Lethargy  or apathy Loss of muscle mass Rash (dermatitis) Shock (late stage) Swelling ( edema )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The  physical exam  may show an enlarged liver ( hepatomegaly ) and general swelling. Tests may include: Arterial blood gas BUN Complete blood count  (CBC)
   Creatinine clearance Serum creatinine Serum potassium Total protein  levels
   Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Getting more calories and protein will correct kwashiorkor, if treatment is started early enough. However, children who have had this condition will never reach their full potential for height and growth. Treatment depends on the severity of the condition. People who are in shock need treatment right away to restore blood volume and maintain blood pressure. Calories are given first in the form of  carbohydrates ,  simple sugars , and fats. Proteins are started after other sources of calories have already provided energy. Vitamin and mineral supplements are essential. Since the person will have been without much food for a long period of time, eating can cause problems, especially if the calories are too high at first. Food must be reintroduced slowly. Many malnourished children will develop intolerance to milk sugar ( lactose intolerance ). They will need to be given supplements with the  enzyme  lactase so that they can tolerate milk products. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Getting treatment early generally leads to good results. Treating kwashiorkor in its late stages will improve the child's general health. However, the child may be left with permanent physical and mental problems. If treatment is not given or comes too late, this condition is life threatening. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Coma Permanent mental and physical disability Shock When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has symptoms of kwashiorkor. Prevention 
 
 To prevent kwashiorkor, make sure the diet has enough carbohydrates, fat (at least 10% of total calories), and protein (12% of total calories). Alternative Names 
 
 Protein malnutrition; Protein-calorie malnutrition; Malignant malnutrition Images 
 
 
 Kwashiorkor symptoms 
 References 
 
 Ashworth A. Nutrition, food security, and health. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 456. Manary MJ, Trehan I. Protein-energy malnutrition. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 215. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 Failure to thrive 
 Fatigue 
 Fussy or irritable child 
 Immune response 
 Protein in diet 
 Shock 
 Swelling 
 Vitiligo 
 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Child Nutrition 
 Dietary Proteins 
 Malnutrition 
 Browse the Encyclopedia