
 Lambert-Eaton syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lambert-Eaton syndrome (LES) is a rare disorder in which faulty communication between nerves and muscles leads to  muscle weakness . Causes 
 
 LES is an  autoimmune disorder . This means your immune system mistakenly targets healthy cells and tissues in the body. With LES,  antibodies  produced by the immune system attack nerve cells. This makes nerves cells unable to release enough of a chemical called acetylcholine. This chemical transmits impulses between nerves and muscles. The result is muscle weakness. LES may occur with cancers such as  small cell lung cancer  or autoimmune disorders such as  vitiligo , which leads to a loss of skin pigment. Symptoms 
 
 Weakness  or loss of movement that can be more or less severe, including: Difficulty climbing stairs or lifting things Drooping of the head The need to use the hands to get up from a sitting or lying position Problems talking Problems chewing or swallowing, which may include gagging or  choking Vision changes, such as  blurry  vision, double vision, and problem keeping a steady gaze Symptoms related to the other parts of the nervous system often occur, and include: 
  Blood pressure changes
   
  Dizziness upon standing
   
  Dry mouth
   Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. The exam may show: 
   Decreased reflexes
    
   Possible loss of muscle tissue
    
   Weakness or paralysis that gets slightly better with activity
    Tests to help diagnose and confirm LES may include: Blood tests to look for the antibodies that attack the nerves Electromyography  (EMG) to test the health of the muscle fibers
    Nerve conduction velocity  (NCV) to test the speed of electrical activity along nerves
    Treatment 
 
 The main goals of treatment are to: Identify and treat any underlying disorders, such as lung cancer Give treatment to help with the weakness Plasma exchange, or plasmapheresis, is a treatment that helps remove from the body any harmful proteins (antibodies) that are interfering with nerve function. This involves removing blood plasma that contains the  antibodies . Other proteins (such as albumin) or donated plasma are then infused into the body. Another procedure involves using intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) to infuse a large amount of helpful antibodies directly into the bloodstream. Medicines that may also be tried include: Drugs that suppress the  immune system's response Anticholinesterase drugs to improve muscle tone (although these are not very effective when given alone) Drugs that increase the release of acetylcholine from nerve cells Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms of LES may improve by treating the underlying disease, suppressing the immune system, or removing the antibodies. However, not everyone responds well to treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of LES may include: Difficulty breathing, including  respiratory failure Difficulty swallowing Infections, such as  pneumonia Injuries from falls and problems with coordination When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms of LES develop. Alternative Names 
 
 Myasthenic syndrome; Eaton-Lambert syndrome; Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; LEMS; LES Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Evoli A, Vincent A. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 422. Sanders DB, Guptill JT. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 109. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Cancer 
 Muscle cramps 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Neuromuscular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia