
 Laryngeal nerve damage 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Laryngeal nerve damage is injury to one or both of the nerves that are attached to the voice box. Causes 
 
 Injury to the laryngeal nerves is uncommon. When it does occur, it can be from: A complication of neck or chest surgery (especially thyroid, lung, heart surgery, or cervical spine surgery) A breathing tube in the windpipe (endotracheal tube) A viral infection that affects the nerves Tumors in the neck or upper chest, such as  thyroid  or  lung cancer Part of a neurological condition  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Difficulty speaking Difficulty swallowing Hoarseness Injury to the left and right laryngeal nerves at the same time can cause a breathing problem. This can be an urgent medical problem. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will check to see how your vocal cords move. Abnormal movement may mean that a laryngeal nerve is injured. Tests may include: Bronchoscopy CT scan  of the chest Laryngoscopy MRI  of the brain, neck, and chest X-ray Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the injury. In some cases, no treatment may be needed and the nerve may recover on its own. Voice therapy is useful in some cases. If surgery is needed, the goal is to change the position of the paralyzed vocal cord to improve the voice. This can be done with: Arytenoid adduction (stitches to move the vocal cord toward the middle of the airway) Injections of collagen, Gelfoam, or another substance Thyroplasty  If both the left and right nerves are damaged, a hole may need to be cut into the windpipe (tracheotomy) right away to allow breathing. This is followed by another surgery at a later date. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause of the injury. In some cases, the nerve rapidly returns to normal. However, sometimes the damage is permanent. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Difficulty breathing (call right away) Unexplained hoarseness that lasts for more than 3 weeks  Alternative Names 
 
 Vocal cord paralysis Images 
 
 
 Nerves of the larynx 
 Laryngeal nerve damage 
 References 
 
 Sandhu GS, Nouraei SAR. Laryngeal and esophageal trauma. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 67. Smith PW, Hanks JB. Evaluation of the isolated neck mass. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:718-724. Read More 
 
 Thyroid nodule 
 
 Review Date 8/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Tang Ho, MD, Assistant Professor, Division of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Voice Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia