
 Laryngitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Laryngitis is swelling and irritation (inflammation) of the voice box (larynx). The problem is most often associated with  hoarseness  or loss of voice. Causes 
 
 The voice box (larynx) is located at the top of the airway to the lungs (trachea). The larynx contains the vocal cords. When the vocal cords become inflamed or infected, they swell. This can cause hoarseness. Sometimes, the airway can get blocked. The most common form of laryngitis is an infection caused by a virus. It may also be caused by: Allergies Bacterial infection Bronchitis Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) Injury Irritants and chemicals Laryngitis often occurs with an  upper respiratory infection , which is typically caused by a virus. Several forms of laryngitis occur in children that can lead to dangerous or fatal respiratory blockage. These forms include: Croup Epiglottitis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Fever Hoarseness Swollen lymph nodes or glands in the neck  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam can find whether hoarseness is caused by a respiratory tract infection. People with hoarseness that lasts more than a month (especially smokers) will need to see an ear, nose, and throat doctor (otolaryngologist). Tests of the throat and upper airway will be done. Treatment 
 
 Common laryngitis is often caused by a virus, so antibiotics likely will not help. Your health care provider will make this decision. Resting your voice helps to reduce inflammation of the vocal cords. A humidifier may soothe the scratchy feeling that comes with laryngitis. Decongestants and pain medicines may relieve the symptoms of an upper respiratory infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Laryngitis that is not caused by a serious condition often gets better on its own. Possible Complications 
 
 In rare cases, severe respiratory distress develops. This requires immediate medical attention. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: A small child who is not teething has difficulty breathing, swallowing, or is  drooling A child less than 3 months old has hoarseness Hoarseness has lasted for more than 1 week in a child, or 2 weeks in an adult Prevention 
 
 To prevent getting laryngitis: Try to avoid people who have upper respiratory infections during cold and flu season. Wash your hands often. DO NOT strain your voice. Stop smoking. This can help prevent tumors of the head and neck or lungs, which can lead to hoarseness.  Alternative Names 
 
 Hoarseness - laryngitis Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 References 
 
 Allen CT, Merati AL. Acute and chronic laryngitis. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Flint PW. Throat disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 429. Roosevelt GE. Acute inflammatory upper airway obstruction (croup, epiglottitis, laryngitis, and bacterial tracheitis). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 385. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Bronchitis - acute 
 Common cold 
 Croup 
 Epiglottitis 
 Flu 
 Hoarseness  
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Croup 
 Throat Disorders 
 Voice Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia