
 Laser surgery - skin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Laser surgery uses laser light to remove diseased tissues or treat bleeding blood vessels. Laser surgery may also be used to remove wrinkles, sunspots, tattoos, or birthmarks. Description 
 
 A laser is a light beam that can be focused on a very small area. The laser heats cells in the area being treated until they "burst." There are several types of lasers. Each laser has specific uses. The color of the light beam used is directly related to the type of surgery being performed and the color of the tissue being treated.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Laser surgery can be used to: Close small blood vessels to reduce blood loss Remove  warts ,  moles , sunspots, and tattoos Reduce the appearance of skin wrinkles, scars, and other skin blemishes Remove dilated blood vessels from the face Remove hair Remove skin cells that could turn into cancer Risks 
 
 Possible risks of laser surgery include: Cold sores if herpes simplex virus is already present Bleeding Problem not going away Infection Pain Scarring Skin color changes Some laser surgery is done when you are asleep and pain free ( general anesthesia ). Talk to your health care provider about risks of laser surgery. After the Procedure 
 
 The success of laser surgery depends on the condition being treated. Talk to your health care provider about what you can expect.  You may need to keep your skin moisturized and out of the sun after treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery time depends on the surgery and your overall health. Ask your health care provider before surgery how much recovery time you will need.  Alternative Names 
 
 Surgery using a laser Images 
 
 
 Laser therapy 
 References 
 
 James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Cutaneous laser surgery. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology.  11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 38. Tung R, Vidimos A. Nonmelanoma skin cancer. In: Carey WD.  Cleveland Clinic: Current Clinical Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010. Read More 
 
 Birthmarks - pigmented 
 Tumor 
 Warts 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Richard J. Moskowitz, MD, dermatologist in private practice, Mineola, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Surgery 
 Browse the Encyclopedia