
 Left heart ventricular angiography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Left heart ventricular angiography is a procedure to look at the left-sided heart chambers and the function of the left-sided valves. It is sometimes combined with coronary angiography. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Before the test, you will be given medicine to help you relax. You will be awake and able to follow instructions during the test. An  intravenous  line is placed in your arm. The health care provider cleans and numbs an area on your arm or groin. A cardiologist makes a small cut in the area, and inserts a thin flexible tube (catheter) into an artery. Using x-rays as a guide, the doctor carefully moves the thin tube (catheter) into your heart. When the tube is in place, dye is injected through it. The dye flows through the blood vessels, making them easier to see. X-rays are taken as the dye moves through the blood vessels. These x-ray pictures create a "movie" of the left ventricle as it contracts rhythmically. The procedure may last from 1 to several hours. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will be told not to eat or drink for 6 to 8 hours before the test. The procedure takes place in the hospital. Some people may need to stay in the hospital the night before the test. A provider will explain the procedure and its risks. You must sign a consent form for the procedure.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel pressure when the catheter is inserted. Occasionally, a flushing sensation or a feeling that you need to urinate occurs when the dye is injected. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Left heart angiography is performed to assess the blood flow through the left side of the heart. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result shows normal blood flow through the left side of the heart. Blood volumes and pressures are also normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: A hole in the heart (ventricular septal defect) Abnormalities of the left heart valves An  aneurysm  of the heart wall Areas of the heart are not contracting normally Blood flow problems on the left side of the heart Heart-related blockages Weakened pumping function of the left ventricle Coronary angiography  may be needed when blockage of the coronary arteries is suspected. Risks 
 
 Risks associated with this procedure include: Abnormal heartbeats ( arrhythmias ) Allergic reaction to dye Artery or vein damage Cardiac tamponade Embolism from  blood clots  at the tip of the catheter Heart failure due to the volume of the dye Infection Kidney failure from the dye Low blood pressure Heart attack Hemorrhage Stroke Considerations 
 
 Right heart catheterization  may be combined with this procedure. Left heart ventricular angiography has some risk because it is an invasive procedure. Other imaging techniques may carry less risk, such as: CT scans Echocardiography Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart Radionuclide ventriculography Your provider may decide to perform one of these procedures instead of left heart ventricular angiography. Alternative Names 
 
 Angiography - left heart; Left ventriculography References 
 
 Davidson CJ, Bonow RO. Cardiac catheterization. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap. 19. Otto CM, Bonow RO. Valvular heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 63. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;29;59(22):1995-2027 PMID: 22578925  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22578925 . 
 Review Date 9/26/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia