
 Leucine aminopeptidase - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Leucine aminopeptidase is a type of protein called an enzyme. It is normally found in liver cells and cells of the small intestine. This test is used to measure how much of this protein appears in your urine. Your blood can also be checked for this  protein . How the Test is Performed 
 
 A 24-hour urine sample is needed. On day 1, urinate into the toilet when you get up in the morning. Afterwards, collect all urine in a special container for the next 24 hours. On day 2, urinate into the container when you get up in the morning. Cap the container. Keep it in the refrigerator or a cool place during the collection period.  Label the container with your name, the date, the time of completion, and return it as instructed. For an infant, thoroughly wash the area where urine exits the body. Open a urine collection bag (a plastic bag with an adhesive paper on one end). For males, place the entire penis in the bag and attach the adhesive to the skin. For females, place the bag over the labia. Diaper as usual over the secured bag.  This procedure may take more than one try. An active infant can move the bag, so that the urine leaks into the diaper.  Check the infant often and change the bag after the infant has urinated into it. Drain the urine from the bag into the container given to you by your health care provider. Deliver the sample to the laboratory or your provider as soon as possible. Your provider will tell you, if needed, to stop taking drugs that may interfere with the test. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your provider may tell you to stop taking any medicines that could affect the test. Drugs that can affect the results of this test include estrogen and progesterone. Never stop taking any medicine without first talking to your doctor. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test to see if there is liver damage. It may also be done to check for certain tumors. This test is only rarely done. Other tests (such as gamma glutamyl transpeptidase) are as accurate and are more easily available. Normal Results 
 
 Normal values range from 2 to 18 units per 24 hours. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased levels of leucine aminopeptidase can be seen in several conditions: Cholestasis Cirrhosis Hepatitis Liver cancer Liver ischemia (reduced blood flow to the liver) Liver  necrosis  (death of live tissue) Liver tumor Pregnancy (late stage) Risks 
 
 There is no real risk. Images 
 
 
 Cirrhosis of the liver 
 Leucine aminopeptidase urine test 
 References 
 
 Berk P, Korenblatt K. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver test results. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 147. Pratt DS. Liver chemistry and function tests. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 73. Read More 
 
 Amino acids 
 Cholestasis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Enzyme 
 Hepatic 
 Hepatitis 
 Leucine aminopeptidase blood test 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Necrosis 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver Diseases 
 Urinalysis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia