
 Leukoplakia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Leukoplakia are patches on the tongue, in the mouth, or on the inside of the cheek.  Causes 
 
 

Leukoplakia affects the mucous membrane of the mouth. The exact cause is not known. It may be due to irritation such as:  Rough teeth  Rough places on dentures, fillings, and crowns  Smoking or other tobacco use (smoker's keratosis), especially pipes  Holding chewing tobacco or snuff in the mouth for a long period of time   Drinking a lot of alcohol The disorder is most common in older adults. A type of leukoplakia of the mouth, called oral hairy leukoplakia, is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus. It is seen mostly in persons with  HIV/AIDS . It may be one of the first signs of HIV infection. Oral hairy leukoplakia can also appear in other people whose immune system is not working well, such as after a  bone marrow transplant . Symptoms 
 
 
Patches in the mouth usually develop on the tongue (sides of the tongue with oral hairy leukoplakia) and on the insides of the cheeks. Leukoplakia patches are: Most often white or gray Uneven in shape Fuzzy (oral hairy leukoplakia) Slightly raised, with a hard surface Unable to be scraped off  Painful when the mouth patches come into contact with acidic or spicy food Exams and Tests 
 
 A  biopsy  of the lesion confirms the diagnosis. Examination of the biopsy may find changes that indicate  oral cancer . Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to get rid of the leukoplakia patch. Removing the source of irritation may cause the patch to disappear. Treat dental causes such as rough teeth, irregular denture surface, or fillings as soon as possible. Stop smoking or using other tobacco products. Do not drink alcohol. If removing the source of the irritation does not work, your health care provider may suggest applying medicine to the patch or using surgery to remove it. For oral hairy leukoplakia, taking antiviral medicine usually causes the patch to disappear. Your provider may also suggest applying medicine to the patch. 
  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Leukoplakia is usually harmless. Patches in the mouth often clear up in a few weeks or months after the source of irritation is removed. In some cases, the patches may be an early sign of cancer.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you have any patches that look like leukoplakia or hairy leukoplakia. Prevention 
 
 Stop smoking or using other tobacco products. Do not drink alcohol, or limit the number of drinks you have. Have rough teeth treated and dental appliances repaired right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Hairy leukoplakia; Smoker's keratosis References 
 
 Marks JG, Miller JJ. Mucous membrane disorders. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 22. Sciubba JJ. Oral mucosal lesions. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Mouth ulcers 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Oral Cancer 
 Tongue Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia