
 Limb plethysmography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Limb plethysmography is a test that compares blood pressure in the legs and arms. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done in the health care provider's office or in a hospital. You will be asked to lie with the upper part of your body slightly raised. Three or four blood pressure cuffs are wrapped snugly around your arm and leg. The provider inflates the cuffs, and a machine called a plethysmograph measures the pulses from each cuff. The test records the maximum pressure produced when the heart contracts (systolic blood pressure). Differences between the pulses are noted. If there is a decrease in the pulse between the arm and leg, it may indicate a blockage. When the test is complete, the blood pressure cuffs are removed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not smoke for at least 30 minutes before the test. You will be asked to remove all clothing from the arm and leg being tested. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You should not have much discomfort with this test. You should only feel the pressure of the blood pressure cuff. The test often takes less than 20 to 30 minutes to perform. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is most often done to check for narrowing or blockages of blood vessels (arteries) in the arms or legs.  Normal Results 
 
 There should be less than a 20 to 30 mm Hg difference in the systolic blood pressure of the leg compared with that of the arm. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Arterial occlusive disease Blood clots Blood vessel changes due to diabetes Injury to an artery Other blood vessel disease (vascular disease) Other conditions for which the test may be performed: Deep venous thrombosis If you have an abnormal result, you may need to have more testing to find the exact site of the narrowing. Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 This test is not as accurate as an  arteriography . Plethysmography may be done for very ill people who cannot travel to the arteriography lab. This test can be used to screen for vascular disease or to follow up earlier abnormal tests. The test is noninvasive, and it does not use x-rays or injection of dye. It is also less expensive than an angiogram. Alternative Names 
 
 Plethysmography - limb References 
 
 Creager MA, Libby P. Peripheral artery diseases. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 58. Fowler GC, Reddy B. Noninvasive venous and arterial studies of the lower extremities. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger & Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 88. Read More 
 
 Arteriogram 
 Blood clots 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Lung plethysmography 
 
 Review Date 6/6/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, RPVI, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Deep Vein Thrombosis 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia