
 Limited range of motion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Limited range of motion is a term meaning that a joint or body part cannot move through its normal range of motion. Considerations 
 
 Motion may be limited because of a problem within the joint,  swelling  of tissue around the joint, stiffness of the muscles, or pain. Causes 
 
 A sudden loss of range of motion may be due to: Dislocation  of a joint Fracture  of an elbow or other joint Infected joint  (hip is most common in children) Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease  (in boys 4 to 10 years old) Nursemaid elbow , an injury to the elbow joint (in young children)  Loss of motion may occur if you damage the bones within a joint. This may happen if you have:  Ankylosing spondylitis  (chronic form of arthritis) Broken a joint bone in the past Frozen shoulder Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Brain, nerve, or muscle disorders can damage the nerves, tendons, and muscles, and can cause loss of motion. Some of these disorders include: Cerebral palsy  (group of disorders that involve brain and nervous system functions) Congenital  torticollis  (wry neck) Muscular dystrophy (group of inherited disorders that cause muscle weakness) Stroke or brain injury Volkmann contracture  (deformity of the hand, fingers, and wrist caused by injury to the muscles of the forearm) Home Care 
 
 Your health care provider may suggest exercises to increase muscle strength and flexibility.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your provider if you have difficulty moving or extending a joint.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms.  You may need  joint x-rays  and  spine x-rays . Laboratory tests may be done.  Physical therapy may be recommended. Images 
 
 
 The structure of a joint 
 Limited range of motion 
 References 
 
 Magee DJ. Primary care assessment. In: Magee DJ, ed.  Orthopedic Physical Assessment . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 17. Read More 
 
 Contracture deformity 
 Spasticity 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Joint Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia