
 Lithotripsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lithotripsy is a procedure that uses shock waves to break up stones in the kidney, bladder, or ureter (tube that carries urine from your kidneys to your bladder). After the procedure, the tiny pieces of stones pass out of your body in your urine. Description 
 
 Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) is the most common type of lithotripsy. "Extracorporeal" means outside the body. To get ready for the procedure, you will put on a hospital gown and lie on an exam table on top of a soft, water-filled cushion.  You will be given medicine for pain or to help you relax before the procedure starts. You will also be given antibiotics. When you have the procedure, you may be given general anesthesia for the procedure. You will be asleep and pain-free. High-energy shock waves, also called sound waves, guided by x-ray or ultrasound, will pass through your body until they hit the kidney stones. If you are awake, you may feel a tapping feeling when this starts. The waves break the stones into tiny pieces. The lithotripsy procedure should take about 45 minutes to 1 hour. A tube may be placed through your bladder or back into your kidney. This tube will drain urine from your kidney until all the small pieces of stone pass out of your body. This may be done before or after your lithotripsy treatment. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Lithotripsy is used to remove kidney stones that are causing: Bleeding Damage to your kidney Pain Urinary tract infections  Not all kidney stones can be removed using lithotripsy. The stone may also be removed with: A  tube  (endoscope) inserted into the kidney through a small surgical cut. A small lighted tube (ureteroscope) inserted through the bladder into ureters. Ureters are the tubes that connect the kidneys to the bladder. Open surgery (rarely needed).  Risks 
 
 Lithotripsy is safe most of the time. Talk to your health care provider about possible complications such as:  Bleeding around your kidney, which may require you to get a blood transfusion Kidney infection Pieces of the stone block urine flow from your kidney (this may cause severe pain or damage to your kidney) Pieces of stone are left in your body (you may need more treatments) Ulcers in your stomach or small intestine Problems with kidney function after the procedure  Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider: If you are or could be pregnant What drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription  During the days before the surgery: You may be asked to stop taking blood thinners such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask your doctor when to stop taking them. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of the surgery.  On the day of your procedure: You may not be allowed to drink or eat anything for several hours before the procedure. Take the drugs you have been told to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 After the procedure, you will stay in the recovery room for up to about 2 hours. Most people are able to  go home the day of their procedure . You will be given a urine strainer to catch the bits of stone passed in your urine.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the number of stones you have, their size, and where in your urinary system they are. Most of the time, lithotripsy removes all the stones. Alternative Names 
 
 Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy; Shock wave lithotripsy; Laser lithotripsy; Percutaneous lithotripsy; Endoscopic lithotripsy; ESWL; Renal calculi-lithotripsy Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Nephrolithiasis 
 Intravenous pyelogram (IVP) 
 Lithotripsy procedure 
 References 
 
 Bushinsky DA. Nephrolithiasis In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 126. Matlaga BR, Lingeman JE. Surgical management of upper urinary tract calculi. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 48.  Read More 
 
 Electrocardiogram 
 Percutaneous urinary procedures 
 X-ray 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Kidney stones and lithotripsy - discharge 
 Kidney stones - self-care 
 Kidney stones - what to ask your doctor 
 Percutaneous urinary procedures - discharge 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Kidney Stones 
 Browse the Encyclopedia