
 Liver transplant 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Liver transplant is surgery to replace a diseased liver with a healthy liver. Description 
 
 The donated liver may be from: A donor who has recently died and has not had liver injury. This type of donor is called a cadaver donor. Sometimes, a healthy person will donate part of his or her liver to a person with a diseased liver. For example, a parent may donate to a child. This kind of donor is called a living donor. The liver can regrow itself. Both people most often end up with fully working livers after a successful transplant. The donor liver is transported in a cooled salt-water (saline) solution that preserves the organ for up to 8 hours. The necessary tests can then be done to match the donor with the recipient. The new liver is removed from the donor through a surgical cut in the upper abdomen. It is placed into the person who needs the liver (called the recipient), and attached to the blood vessels and  bile  ducts. The operation may take up to 12 hours. The recipient will often need a large amount of blood through a transfusion. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 A healthy liver performs more than 400 jobs each day, including: Making bile, which is important in digestion Making proteins that help with blood clotting Removing or changing bacteria, medicines, and toxins in the blood Storing sugars, fats, iron, copper, and vitamins The most common reason for a liver transplant in children is  biliary atresia . The most common reason for a liver transplant in adults is  cirrhosis . Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver that prevents the liver from working well. It can worsen to liver failure. The most common causes of cirrhosis are: Long-term infection with  hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C Long-term  alcohol abuse Other illnesses that may cause cirrhosis and liver failure include: Autoimmune hepatitis Hepatic  vein blood  clot  (thrombosis) Liver damage from poisoning or medicines Problems with the drainage system of the liver (the biliary tract), such as  primary biliary cirrhosis  or  primary sclerosing cholangitis Metabolic disorders of copper or iron ( Wilson disease  and  hemochromatosis ) Fatty liver disease Liver transplant surgery is often not recommended for people who have: Certain infections, such as tuberculosis or  osteomyelitis Difficulty taking medicines several times each day for the rest of their lives Heart or lung disease (or other life-threatening diseases) History of cancer Infections, such as hepatitis, that are considered to be active Smoking, alcohol or drug abuse, or other risky lifestyle habits Risks 
 
 Risks for any anesthesia are: Problems breathing Reactions to medicines Risks for any surgery are: Bleeding Heart attack or stroke Infection Liver transplant surgery and management after surgery carry major risks. There is an increased risk of infection because you must take medicines that suppress the immune system to prevent transplant rejection. Signs of infection include: Diarrhea 
   Drainage
    Fever 
   Jaundice
    
   Redness
    
   Swelling
    
   Tenderness
    Before the Procedure 
 
 Your health care provider will refer you to a transplant center. The transplant team will want to make sure that you are a good candidate for a liver transplant. You will make a few visits over several weeks or months. You will need to have blood drawn and x-rays taken. If you are the person getting the new liver, the following tests will be done before the procedure: Tissue  and blood typing to make sure your body will not reject the donated liver Blood tests or skin tests to check for infection Heart tests such as an  EKG ,  echocardiogram , or  cardiac catheterization Tests to look for early cancer Tests to look at your liver, gallbladder, pancreas, small intestine, and the blood vessels around the liver Colonoscopy, depending on your age  You may choose to look at one or more transplant centers to determine which is best for you: Ask the center how many transplants they perform every year, and their survival rates. Compare these numbers to those of other transplant centers. Ask what support groups they have available, and what travel and housing arrangements they offer.  If the transplant team thinks you are a good candidate for a liver transplant, you will be put on a national waiting list. Your place on the waiting list is based on a number of factors. Key factors include the type of liver problems you have, how severe your disease is, and the likelihood that a transplant will be successful. The amount of time you spend on a waiting list is most often not a factor in how soon you get a liver, with the possible exception of children.  While you are waiting for a liver, follow these steps: Follow any diet your transplant team recommends. Do not drink alcohol. Do not smoke. Keep your weight in the appropriate range. Follow the exercise program your provider recommends. Take all medicines prescribed for you. Report changes in your medicines and any new or worsening medical problems to the transplant team. Follow-up with your regular provider and transplant team at any appointments that have been made. Make sure the transplant team has your correct phone numbers, so they can contact you immediately if a liver becomes available. Make sure that, no matter where you are going, you can be contacted quickly and easily. Have everything ready ahead of time to go to the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 If you received a donated liver, you will likely need to stay in the hospital for a week or longer. After that, you will need to be closely followed up by a doctor for the rest of your life. You will have regular blood tests after the transplant. The recovery period is about 6 to 12 months. Your transplant team may ask you to stay close to the hospital for the first 3 months. You will need to have regular check-ups, with blood tests and x-rays for many years. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who receive a liver transplant may reject the new organ. This means that their immune system sees the new liver as a foreign substance and tries to destroy it. To avoid rejection, almost all transplant recipients must take medicines that suppress their immune response for the rest of their lives. This is called immunosuppressive therapy. Although the treatment helps prevent organ rejection, it also puts people at a higher risk for infection and cancer. If you take immunosuppressive medicine, you need to be regularly screened for cancer. The medicines may also cause high blood pressure and high cholesterol, and increase the risks for diabetes. A successful transplant requires close follow-up with your provider. You must always take your medicine as directed. Alternative Names 
 
 Hepatic transplant; Transplant - liver; Orthotopic liver transplant; Liver failure - liver transplant; Cirrhosis - liver transplant Images 
 
 
 Donor liver attachment 
 Liver transplant  - series 
 References 
 
 Carrion AF, Martin P. Liver transplantation. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 97. Everson GT. Hepatic failure and liver transplantation. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 154. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Biliary atresia 
 Blood clots 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatic 
 Hepatitis 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Wilson disease 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Transplantation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia