
 Lordosis - lumbar 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lordosis is the inward curve of the lumbar spine (just above the buttocks). A small degree of lordosis is normal. Too much curving is called swayback.  Causes 
 
 Lordosis tends to make the buttocks appear more prominent. Children with hyperlordosis will have a large space underneath the lower back when lying face up on a hard surface. Some children have marked lordosis, but, most often fixes itself as the child grows. This is called benign juvenile lordosis. Spondylolisthesis  may cause lordosis. In this condition, a bone (vertebra) in the spine slips out of the proper position onto the bone below it. You may be born with this. It can develop after certain sports activities, such as gymnastics. It may develop along with arthritis in the spine. Much less common causes in children include: Achondroplasia , a disorder of bone growth that causes the most common type of dwarfism Muscular dystrophy Other genetic conditions Home Care 
 
 Most of the time, lordosis is not treated if the back is flexible. It is not likely to progress or cause problems. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice that your child has an exaggerated posture or a curve in the back. Your provider must check to see if there is a medical problem. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam. To examine the spine, your child may have to bend forward, to the side, and to lie flat on a table. If the lordotic curve is flexible (when the child bends forward the curve reverses itself), it is generally not a concern. If the curve does not move, medical evaluation and treatment are needed. Other tests may be needed, particularly if the curve seems "fixed" (not bendable). These may include:  Lumbosacral spine x-ray Other tests to rule out disorders that could be causing the condition MRI of the spine Laboratory tests Alternative Names 
 
 Swayback; Arched back; Lordosis - lumbar Images 
 
 
 Skeletal spine 
 Lordosis 
 References 
 
 Carson BS, Rigamonti D, Ahn ES. Achondroplasia and other dwarfisms. In: Winn HR, ed.  Youmans Neurological Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 219. Mistovich RJ, Spiegel DA. The spine. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 679. Warner WC, Sawyer JR, Kelly DM. Scoliosis and kyphosis. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 41. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia