
 Low nasal bridge 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A low nasal bridge is the flattening of the top part of the nose. Considerations 
 
 Genetic diseases or infections may cause decreased growth of the bridge of nose.  A decrease in the height of the bridge of nose is best seen from a side view of the face. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Cleidocranial dysostosis Congenital syphilis Down syndrome Normal variation Other syndromes that are present at birth (congenital) Williams syndrome When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have questions about the shape of your child's nose. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam. The provider may ask questions about your child's family and medical history. Laboratory studies may include: Chromosome studies Enzyme  assays (blood tests to measure specific enzyme levels) Metabolic studies X-rays  Alternative Names 
 
 Saddle nose Images 
 
 
 The face 
 Low nasal bridge 
 References 
 
 Farrior RT, Farrior EH, Eisler LS. Special rhinoplasty techniques. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 35. Jones KL, Jones MC, Campo MD. Osteochondrodysplasias. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo MD, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap K. Schmitz MR, Rush JK, Milbrandt TA. Pediatric orthopaedics. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  Miller's Review of Orthopaedics . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 3. Slavotinek A. Dysmorphology. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 108. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia