
 Low sodium level 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Low sodium level is a condition in which the amount of sodium (salt) in the blood is lower than normal. The medical name of this condition is hyponatremia. Causes 
 
 Sodium is found mostly in the body fluids outside the cells. It is very important for maintaining blood pressure. Sodium is also needed for nerves, muscles, and other body tissues to work properly. When the amount of sodium in fluids outside cells drops below normal, water moves into the cells to balance the levels. This causes the cells to swell with too much water. Brain cells are especially sensitive to swelling, and this causes many of the symptoms of low sodium. With low sodium level (hyponatremia),  the imbalance of water to salt  is caused by one of three conditions: Euvolemic hyponatremia -- total body water increases, but the body's sodium content stays the same Hypervolemic hyponatremia -- both sodium and water content in the body increase, but the water gain is greater Hypovolemic hyponatremia -- water and sodium are both lost from the body, but the sodium loss is greater Low sodium can be caused by: Burns  that affect a large area of the body         Diarrhea Diuretic medicines, which increase urine output Heart failure Kidney diseases Liver  cirrhosis Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion  (SIADH) Sweating Vomiting Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms include: Confusion Convulsions Fatigue Headache Irritability Loss of appetite Muscle spasms  or cramps Muscle weakness Nausea Restlessness Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a complete  physical examination  to help determine the cause of your symptoms. Blood and urine tests will be done. Lab tests that can confirm and help diagnose low sodium include: Comprehensive metabolic panel  (includes blood sodium) Osmolality  blood test Urine osmolality Urine sodium Treatment 
 
 The cause of low sodium must be diagnosed and treated. If cancer is the cause of the condition, then radiation,  chemotherapy , or surgery to remove the tumor may correct the sodium imbalance. Other treatments depend on the specific type of hyponatremia. Treatments may include: Fluids through a vein (IV) Medication to relieve symptoms Water restriction Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on the condition that is causing the problem. Low sodium that occurs in less than 48 hours (acute hyponatremia), is more dangerous than low sodium that develops slowly over time. When sodium level falls slowly over days or weeks (chronic hyponatremia), the brain cells have time to adjust and swelling may be minimal. Possible Complications 
 
 In severe cases, low sodium can lead to: Decreased consciousness, hallucinations or coma Brain herniation Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 When your body’s sodium level drops too much, it can be a life-threatening emergency. Call your provider right away if you have symptoms of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Treating the condition that is causing low sodium can help.  If you play sports or do other vigorous activity, drink fluids such as sports drinks that contain  electrolytes  to keep your body's sodium level in a healthy range. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyponatremia; Dilutional hyponatremia; Euvolemic hyponatremia; Hypervolemic hyponatremia; Hypovolemic hyponatremia References 
 
 Pfennig CL, Slovis CM. Electrolyte disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 125. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Antidiuretic hormone blood test 
 Central nervous system 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 Electrolytes 
 Fluid imbalance 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Meningitis 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Prostate cancer 
 Psychosis 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
 Sodium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia