
 Lumbosacral spine CT 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lumbosacral spine CT is a  computed tomography  scan of the lower spine and surrounding tissues. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the CT scanner. You will need to lie on your back for this test. Once inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you. Small detectors inside the scanner measure the amount of x-rays that make it through the part of the body being studied. A computer takes this information and uses it to create a number of images, called slices. These images can be stored, viewed on a monitor, or printed on film. Three-dimensional models of organs can be created by stacking the individual slices together. You must be still during the exam, because movement causes blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short periods. In some cases, an iodine-based dye, called contrast, may be injected into your vein before images are taken. Contrast can highlight specific areas inside the body, which creates a clearer image. In other cases, a CT of the lumbosacral spine is done after injecting contrast dye into the spinal canal during a  lumbar puncture  to further check for pressure on the nerves. The scan usually lasts a few minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should remove all jewelry or other metal objects before the test. This is because they may cause inaccurate and blurry images. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-rays are painless. Some people may have discomfort from lying on the hard table. Contrast may cause a slight burning sensation, a metallic taste in the mouth, and a warm flushing of the body. These sensations are normal and usually go away within a few seconds. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 CT rapidly creates detailed pictures of the body. A CT of the lumbosacral spine can evaluate fractures and changes of the spine, such as those due to arthritis or deformities. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 CT of the lumbosacral spine may reveal the following conditions or diseases: Cyst Herniated disk Infection Cancer that has spread to the spine Osteoarthritis Osteomalacia  (softening of the bones) Pinched nerve Tumor Vertebral  fracture  (broken spine bone) Risks 
 
 The most common type of contrast given into a vein contains iodine. If a person with an iodine allergy is given this type of contrast,  hives ,  itching ,  nausea ,  breathing difficulty , or other symptoms may occur. If you have kidney problems, diabetes or are on kidney dialysis, talk to your health care provider before the test about your risks. CT scans and other x-rays are strictly monitored and controlled to make sure they use the least amount of radiation. The risk associated with any individual scan is small. The risk increases when many more scans are performed. In some cases, a CT scan may still be done if the benefits greatly outweigh the risks. For example, it can be more risky not to have the exam if your provider thinks you might have cancer. Pregnant or breastfeeding women should consult their provider about the risk of CT scans to the baby. Radiation during pregnancy can affect the baby, and the dye used with CT scans can enter breast milk. Alternative Names 
 
 Spinal CT; CT - lumbosacral spine; Low back pain - CT; LBP - CT Images 
 
 
 CT scan 
 Skeletal spine 
 Vertebra, lumbar (low back) 
 Vertebra, thoracic (mid back) 
 Lumbar vertebrae 
 References 
 
 Shaw AS, Prokop M. Computed tomography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 4.  Thomsen HS, Reimer P. Intravascular contrast media for radiography, CT, MRI, and ultrasound. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 2. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 CT scan 
 Cyst 
 Herniated disk 
 Osteoarthritis 
 Osteomalacia 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 CT Scans 
 Herniated Disk 
 Osteoarthritis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia