
 Lumbosacral spine x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lumbosacral spine  x-ray  is a picture of the small bones (vertebrae) in the lower part of the spine. This area includes the lumbar region and the sacrum, the area that connects the spine to the pelvis. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital x-ray department or your health care provider's office by an x-ray technician. You will be asked to lie on the x-ray table in different positions. If the x-ray is being done to diagnose an injury, care will be taken to prevent further injury. The x-ray machine will be placed over the lower part of your spine. You will be asked to hold your breath as the picture is taken so that the image will not be blurry. Usually, 3 to 5 pictures are taken. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the provider if you are pregnant. Take off all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is rarely any discomfort when having an x-ray, although the table may be cold. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Often, a provider will treat a person with low back pain for 4 to 8 weeks before ordering an x-ray. The most common reason for lumbosacral spine x-ray is to look for the cause of low back pain that: Occurs after injury Is severe Does not go away after 4 to 8 weeks Is present in an older person  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Lumbosacral spine x-rays may show: Abnormal curves of the spine Abnormal wear on the cartilage and bones of the lower spine, such as bone spurs and narrowing of the joints between the vertebrae Cancer (although cancer often cannot be seen on this type of x-ray) Fractures Signs of thinning bones ( osteoporosis ) Spondylolisthesis , in which a bone (vertebra) in the lower part of the spine slips out of the proper position onto the bone below it  Though some of these findings may be seen on an x-ray, they are not always the cause of back pain.  Many problems in the spine cannot be diagnosed using a lumbosacral x-ray, including: Sciatica Slipped or herniated disc Spinal stenosis  - narrowing of the spinal column  Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-ray machines are checked often to make sure they are as safe as possible. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women should not be exposed to radiation, if at all possible. Care should be taken before children receive x-rays. Considerations 
 
 There are some back problems that an x-ray will not find. That is because they involve the muscles, nerves, and other soft tissues. A lumbosacral spine CT or lumbosacral spine MRI are better options for soft tissue problems. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - lumbosacral spine; X-ray - lower spine Images 
 
 
 Skeletal spine 
 Vertebra, lumbar (low back) 
 Vertebra, thoracic (mid back) 
 Vertebral column 
 Sacrum 
 Posterior spinal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Chou R, Qaseem A, Owens DK, Shekelle P; for the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Diagnostic imaging for low back pain: advice for high-value health care from the American College of Physicians.  Ann Intern Med . 2011;154(3):181-9. PMID: 21282698  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21282698 .  Pzarizel PM, Van Thielen T, van den Hauwe, Van Goethem JW. Degenerative disease of the spine. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 55.  Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Herniated disk 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Weakness 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dennis Ogiela, MD, Orthopedic Surgery and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT.  Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Back Injuries 
 Back Pain 
 Herniated Disk 
 Osteoporosis 
 Scoliosis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia