
 Lung transplant 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lung transplant is surgery to replace one or both diseased lungs with healthy lungs from a human donor. Description 
 
 In most cases, the new lung or lungs are usually donated by a person who is under age 65 and brain-dead, but is still on life-support. The donor tissue must be matched as closely as possible to your tissue type. This reduces the chance that the body will reject the  transplant . Lungs can also be given by living donors. Two or more people are needed. Each person donates a segment (lobe) of their lung. This forms an entire lung for the person who is receiving it.  During lung transplant surgery, you are asleep and pain-free (under  general anesthesia ). A surgical cut is made in the chest. Lung transplant surgery is often done with the use of a heart-lung machine. This device does the work of your heart and lungs while your heart and lungs are stopped for the surgery.  For single lung transplants, the cut is made on the side of your chest where the lung will be transplanted. The operation takes 4 to 8 hours. In most cases, the lung with the worst function is removed. For double lung transplants, the cut is made below the breast and reaches to both sides of the chest. Surgery takes 6 to 12 hours.  After the cut is made, the major steps during lung transplant surgery include:  One or both of your lungs are removed. For people who are having a double lung transplant, most or all of the steps from the first side are completed before the second side is done. The main blood vessels and airway of the new lung are sewn to your blood vessels and airway. The donor lobe or lung is stitched (sutured) into place. Chest tubes are inserted to drain air, fluid, and blood out of the chest for several days to allow the lungs to fully re-expand.  Sometimes, heart and lung transplants are done at the same time (heart-lung transplant) if the heart is also diseased.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 In most cases, a lung transplant is done only after all other treatments for lung failure are unsuccessful. Lung transplants may be recommended for people under age 65 who have severe lung disease. Some examples of diseases that may require a lung transplant are: Cystic fibrosis Damage to the arteries of the lung because of a  defect in the heart at birth (congenital defect ) Destruction of the large airways and lung ( bronchiectasis ) Emphysema or  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Lung conditions in which the lung tissues become swollen and scarred ( interstitial lung disease ) High blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs ( pulmonary hypertension ) Sarcoidosis Lung transplant may not be done for people who:  Are too sick or  badly nourished  to go through the procedure Continue to smoke or abuse alcohol or other drugs Have active hepatitis B,  hepatitis  C, or  HIV Have had cancer within the past 2 years Have  lung disease  that will likely affect the new lung Have severe disease of other organs Cannot reliably take their medicines Are unable to keep up with the hospital and health care visits and tests that are needed Risks 
 
 Risks of lung transplant include:
 Blood clots ( deep venous thrombosis )
  Diabetes , bone thinning, or high cholesterol levels from the medicines given after a transplant
  Increased risk for infections due to anti-rejection (immunosuppression) medicines Damage to your kidneys, liver, or other organs from anti-rejection medicines
  Future risk of certain cancers
  Problems at the place where the new blood vessels and airways were attached
  Rejection  of the new lung, which may happen right away, within the first 4 to 6 weeks, or over time
  Before the Procedure 
 
 You will have the following tests to determine if you are a good candidate for the operation:  Blood tests or skin tests to check for infections Blood typing Tests to evaluate your heart, such as  electrocardiogram  (EKG),  echocardiogram , or  cardiac catheterization Tests to evaluate your lungs Tests to look for early cancer ( Pap smear ,  mammogram ,  colonoscopy ) Tissue typing, to help make sure your body will not reject the donated lung  Good candidates for transplant are put on a regional waiting list. Your place on the waiting list is based on a number of factors, including:  What type of lung problems you have The severity of your lung disease The likelihood that a transplant will be successful  For most adults, the amount of time you spend on a waiting list most often does not determine how soon you get a lung. Waiting time is often at least 2 to 3 years.  While you are waiting for a new lung:  Follow any diet your lung transplant team recommends. Stop drinking alcohol, do not smoke, and keep your weight in the recommended range. Take all medicines as they were prescribed. Report changes in your medicines and medical problems that are new or get worse to the transplant team. Follow any exercise program that you were taught during pulmonary rehabilitation. Keep any appointments that you have made with your regular health care provider and transplant team. Let the transplant team know how to contact you right away if a lung becomes available. Make sure that you can be contacted quickly and easily. Be prepared in advance to go to the hospital.  Before the procedure, always tell your provider:  What drugs, vitamins, herbs, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription If you have been drinking a lot of alcohol (more than one or two drinks a day)  Do not eat or drink anything when you are told to come to the hospital for your lung transplant. Take only the drugs that you have been told to take with a small sip of water.  After the Procedure 
 
 You should expect to stay in the hospital for 7 to 21 days after a lung transplant. You will likely spend time in the intensive care unit (ICU) right after surgery. Most centers that perform lung transplants have standard ways of treating and managing lung transplant patients.
 The recovery period is about 6 months. Often, your transplant team will ask you to stay close to the hospital for the first 3 months. You will need to have regular check-ups with blood tests and x-rays for many years.
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A lung transplant is a major procedure that is performed for people with life-threatening lung disease or damage.  About four out of five patients are still alive 1 year after the transplant. About two out of five transplant recipients are alive at 5 years. The highest risk of death is during the first year, mainly from problems such as rejection.  Fighting rejection is an ongoing process. The body's immune system considers the transplanted organ as an invader and may attack it.  To prevent rejection, organ transplant patients must take anti-rejection (immunosuppression) drugs. These drugs suppress the body's  immune response  and reduce the chance of rejection. As a result, however, these drugs also reduce the body's natural ability to fight off infections.  By 5 years after a lung transplant, at least one in five people develop cancers or have problems with the heart. For most people, the quality of life is improved after a lung transplant. They have better exercise endurance and are able to do more on a daily basis.  Alternative Names 
 
 Solid organ transplant - lung Images 
 
 
 Lung transplant - series 
 References 
 
 Flume PA, Mogayzel PJ Jr, Robinson KA, Rosenblatt RL, Quittell L, Marshall BC; Clinical Practice Guidelines for Pulmonary Therapies Committee; Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Pulmonary Therapies Committee. Cystic fibrosis pulmonary guidelines: pulmonary complications: hemoptysis and pneumothorax.  Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2010;182(3):298-306. PMID: 20675678  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20675678 .  Kotloff RM, Keshavjee S. Lung transplantation. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst MD, et al.  Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 106. Putnam JB. Lung, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 58. Solomon M, Grasemann H, Keshavjee S. Pediatric lung transplantation.  Pediatr Clin North Am . 2010; 57(2):375-91. PMID: 20371042  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20371042 .  Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
 Lung disease 
 Sarcoidosis 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dale Mueller, MD, cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, HeartCare Midwest; Chairman Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Surgery, OSF St. Francis Medical Center; and Clinical Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Illinois, Peoria, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Transplantation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia