
 Lung metastases 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lung metastases are cancerous tumors that start somewhere else in the body and spread to the lungs. Causes 
 
 Metastatic tumors in the lungs are cancers that developed at other places in the body (or other parts of the lungs). They then spread through the bloodstream or lymphatic system to the lungs. It is different than lung cancer that starts in the lungs.  Nearly any cancer can spread to the lungs. Common cancers include: Bladder cancer Breast cancer Colon cancer Kidney cancer Melanoma Ovarian cancer Sarcoma Thyroid cancer Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bloody sputum Chest pain Cough Shortness of breath Weakness Weight loss  In most cases, there are no lung-related symptoms when the tumors are found. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Bronchoscopy  to view the airways Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Cytologic studies of pleural fluid  or sputum Lung needle biopsy Surgery to take a sample of tissue from the lungs (surgical lung biopsy)  Treatment 
 
 Chemotherapy is used to treat metastatic cancer to the lung. Surgery to remove the tumors may be done when any of the following occurs: The first (primary) tumor has been removed The cancer has spread to only limited areas of the lung The lung tumors can be completely removed with surgery  However, the main tumor must be curable, and the person must be strong enough to go through the surgery and recovery. Less common treatments include: Radiation therapy The placement of  stents  inside the airways Laser therapy Experimental treatments may be recommended, such as: Using local heat probes to destroy the area. Placing chemotherapy medicines directly into the artery that supplies blood to the part of the lung containing the tumor. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A cure is unlikely in most cases of cancers that have spread to the lungs. But the outlook depends on the main cancer. Some cancers, such as lymphoma, are very treatable, and even curable. In rare cases, a person can live more than 5 years with metastatic cancer to the lungs. You and your family may want to start thinking about end-of-life planning, such as:  Palliative care Hospice care Advance care directives Health care agents Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of metastatic tumors in the lungs may include: Fluid between the lung and chest wall (pleural effusion), which can cause shortness of breath or pain when taking a deep breath Further spread of the cancer Side effects of  chemotherapy  or radiation therapy  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have a history of cancer and you develop: 
   Coughing up blood
    
   Persistent cough
    Shortness of breath 
   Unexplained weight loss
    Prevention 
 
 Not all cancers can be prevented. However, many can be prevented by: Eating healthy foods Exercising regularly Limiting alcohol consumption Not smoking  Alternative Names 
 
 Metastases to the lung; Metastatic cancer to the lung; Lung cancer - metastases Images 
 
 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Lung cancer, lateral chest x-ray 
 Lung cancer, frontal chest x-ray 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated 
 Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated 
 Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray 
 Pulmonary nodule, solitary - CT scan 
 Sarcoid, stage II - chest x-ray 
 Lung with squamous cell cancer - CT scan 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Arenberg DA, Pickens A. Metastatic malignant tumors. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 55. Putnam JB. Lung, chest wall, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 57. Ripley RT, Rusch VW. Lung metastases. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 52. Read More 
 
 Bladder cancer 
 Breast cancer 
 Cancer 
 Chemotherapy 
 Colon cancer 
 Lung cancer 
 Neuroblastoma 
 Prostate cancer 
 Radiation therapy 
 Wilms tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia