
 Lung disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lung disease is any problem in the lungs that prevents the lungs from working properly. There are three main types of lung disease: Airway diseases -- These diseases affect the tubes (airways) that carry oxygen and other gases into and out of the lungs. They usually cause a narrowing or blockage of the airways. Airway diseases include  asthma ,  COPD  and  bronchiectasis . People with airway diseases often say they feel as if they're "trying to breathe out through a straw." Lung tissue diseases -- These diseases affect the structure of the lung tissue. Scarring or inflammation of the tissue makes the lungs unable to expand fully (restrictive lung disease). This makes it hard for the lungs to take in oxygen and release carbon dioxide. People with this type of lung disorder often say they feel as if they are "wearing a too-tight sweater or vest." As a result, they can't breathe deeply.  Pulmonary fibrosis  and  sarcoidosis  are examples of lung tissue disease. Lung circulation diseases -- These diseases affect the blood vessels in the lungs. They are caused by clotting, scarring, or inflammation of the blood vessels. They affect the ability of the lungs to take up oxygen and release carbon dioxide. These diseases may also affect heart function. An example of a lung circulation disease is pulmonary  hypertension .  Many lung diseases involve a combination of these three types. The most common lung diseases include: 
  Asthma
   Collapse of part or all of the lung ( pneumothorax  or  atelectasis ) Swelling and inflammation in the main passages (bronchial tubes) that carry air to the lungs ( bronchitis ) COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) Lung cancer Lung infection ( pneumonia ) Abnormal buildup of fluid in the lungs ( pulmonary edema )
   Blocked lung artery ( pulmonary embolus ) Images 
 
 
 Pulmonary mass - side view chest x-ray 
 Lung mass, right lung - CT scan 
 Lung mass, right upper lung - chest x-ray 
 Lung with squamous cell cancer - CT scan 
 Secondhand smoke and lung cancer 
 Yellow nail syndrome 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Kraft M. Approach to the patient with respiratory disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 83. Reid PT, Innes JA. Respiratory disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Penman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Asbestosis 
 Aspergillosis 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Asthma 
 Atelectasis 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 Histiocytosis 
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Lung metastases 
 Pleural effusion 
 Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Pneumonia - weakened immune system 
 Pulmonary actinomycosis 
 Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis 
 Pulmonary arteriovenous fistula 
 Pulmonary aspergilloma 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Pulmonary nocardiosis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease 
 Rheumatoid lung disease 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - adults - discharge 
 COPD - control drugs 
 COPD - quick-relief drugs 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia