
 Lupus nephritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lupus nephritis is a kidney disorder which is a complication of  systemic lupus erythematosus . Causes 
 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE or lupus) is an  autoimmune disease . This means there is a problem with the body's immune system. Normally, the immune system helps protect the body from infection or harmful substances. But in people with an autoimmune disease, the immune system cannot tell the difference between harmful substances and healthy ones. As a result, the immune system attacks otherwise healthy cells and tissues. SLE may damage different parts of the kidney. This can lead lead to disorders such as  interstitial nephritis ,  nephrotic syndrome , and  membranous glomerulonephritis . Over time, kidney failure can result. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of lupus nephritis include: Blood in the urine Foamy appearance to urine High blood pressure Swelling  of any area of the body Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam shows signs of decreased kidney functioning with body swelling (edema). Blood pressure may be high. Abnormal sounds may be heard when the doctor listens to your heart and lungs. Tests that may be done include: ANA  titer BUN  and  creatinine Complement  levels Urinalysis Urine protein Kidney biopsy , to determine appropriate treatment Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to improve kidney function and to delay kidney failure. Medicines may include drugs that suppress the immune system, such as corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, or azathioprine. You may need dialysis to control symptoms of kidney failure, sometimes for only a while. A kidney transplant may be recommended. People with active lupus should not have a transplant because the condition can occur in the transplanted kidney. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do, depends on the specific form of lupus nephritis. You may have flare-ups, and then times when you do not have any symptoms.  Some people with this condition develop chronic kidney failure. Although lupus nephritis may return in a transplanted kidney, it rarely leads to end-stage kidney disease. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result from lupus nephritis include: Acute renal failure Chronic renal failure When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have  blood in the urine  or  swelling  of your body. If you have lupus nephritis, call your provider if you notice  decreased urine output . Prevention 
 
 Treating lupus may help prevent or delay onset of lupus nephritis. Alternative Names 
 
 Nephritis - lupus; Lupus glomerular disease  Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Appel GB, Jayne D, Rovin BH. Lupus nephritis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 26. Hahn BH, McMahon M, Wilkinson A, et al. American College of Rheumatology Guidelines for Screening, Case Definition, Treatment and Management of Lupus Nephritis.  Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) . 2012;64(6):797-808. PMC:3437757  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3437757 . Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Antibody 
 Antinuclear antibody panel 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Complement 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Immune response 
 Incidence 
 Interstitial nephritis 
 Membranous nephropathy 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Scleroderma 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Urine - bloody  
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lupus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia