
 Lymphogranuloma venereum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is a sexually transmitted bacterial infection. Causes 
 
 Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is a long-term (chronic) infection of the lymphatic system. It is caused by any of 3 different types (serovars) of the bacteria  Chlamydia trachomatis.  The bacteria are spread by sexual contact. The infection is not caused by the same bacteria that cause genital  chlamydia . LGV is more common in Central and South America than in North America.  LGV is more common in men than women. The main risk factor is being HIV-positive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of LGV can begin a few days to a month after coming in contact with the bacteria. Symptoms include: Drainage through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin Painful bowel movements ( tenesmus ) Small painless sore on the male genitals or in the female genital tract Swelling and redness of the skin in the groin area Swelling of the labia (in women) Swollen groin lymph nodes on one or both sides; it may also affect lymph nodes around the rectum in people who have anal intercourse Blood or pus from the rectum ( blood in the stools ) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical and sexual history. Tell your provider if you had sexual contact with someone you think has had symptoms of LGV. A physical exam may show: An oozing, abnormal connection (fistula) in the rectal area A sore on the genitals Drainage through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin Swelling of the vulva or labia in women Swollen lymph nodes in the groin (inguinal  lymphadenopathy ) Tests may include: Biopsy  of the lymph node Blood test for the bacteria that causes LGV Laboratory test to detect chlamydia Treatment 
 
 LGV is treated with antibiotics, including doxycycline and erythromycin. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, the outlook is good. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from LVG infection include: Abnormal connections between the rectum and vagina ( fistula ) Brain inflammation ( encephalitis  - very rare) Infections in the joints, eyes, heart, or liver Long-term inflammation and swelling of the genitals Scarring and narrowing of the rectum Complications can occur many years after you are first infected. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have been in contact with someone who may have a sexually transmitted infection, including LGV You develop symptoms of LGV Prevention 
 
 Not having any sexual activity is the only way to prevent a sexually transmitted infection.  Safer sex behaviors  may reduce the risk. The proper use of condoms, either the  male  or  female  type, greatly decreases the risk of catching a sexually transmitted infection. You need to wear the condom from the beginning to the end of each sexual activity. Alternative Names 
 
 LGV; Lymphogranuloma inguinale; Lymphopathia venereum Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 References 
 
 Batteiger BE, Tan M. Chlamydia trachomatis (trachoma, genital Infections, perinatal infections, and lymphogranuloma venereum). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 182. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower and upper genital tracts: vulva, vagina, cervix, toxic shock syndrome, endometritis, and salpingitis. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Chancroid 
 Chlamydia 
 Erosion 
 Malaise 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 Systemic 
 Tenesmus 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chlamydia Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia