
 Lymph system 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The lymph system is a network of organs, lymph nodes, lymph ducts, and lymph vessels that make and move lymph from tissues to the bloodstream. The lymph system is a major part of the body's immune system. Watch this video about: Lymphatics and the breast Information 
 
 Lymph is a clear-to-white fluid made of: White blood cells, especially lymphocytes, the cells that attack bacteria in the blood Fluid from the intestines called chyle, which contains proteins and fats  Lymph nodes are soft, small, round- or bean-shaped structures. They usually cannot be seen or easily felt. They are located in clusters in various parts of the body, such as the:  Neck Armpit Groin Inside the center of the chest and abdomen  Watch this video about: Lymph nodes Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. When bacteria are recognized in the lymph fluid, the lymph nodes make more infection-fighting white blood cells. This causes the nodes to swell. The swollen nodes are sometimes felt in the neck, under the arms, and groin.  The lymph system includes the:  Tonsils Adenoids Spleen Thymus  Alternative Names 
 
 Lymphatic system Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Lymphatic system 
 References 
 
 Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Lymphatic system. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 9. Hall JE. The microcirculation and lymphatic system: capillary fluid exchange, interstitial fluid, and lymph flow. In: Hall JE, ed.  Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Lymphangitis  
 
 Review Date 9/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia