
 Magnesium in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Magnesium is an essential mineral for human nutrition. Function 
 
 Magnesium is needed for more than 300 biochemical reactions in the body. It helps to maintain normal nerve and muscle function, supports a healthy immune system, keeps the heart beat steady, and helps bones remain strong. It also helps regulate blood glucose levels and aid in the production of energy and protein. There is ongoing research into the role of magnesium in preventing and managing disorders such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes. However, taking magnesium supplements is not currently recommended. Diets high in protein, calcium, or vitamin D will increase the need for magnesium. Food Sources 
 
 Most dietary magnesium comes from vegetables, such as dark green, leafy vegetables. Other foods that are good sources of magnesium: Fruits or vegetables (such as bananas, dried apricots, and avocados) Nuts (such as almonds and cashews) Peas and beans (legumes), seeds Soy products (such as soy flour and tofu) Whole grains (such as brown rice and millet) Milk Side Effects 
 
 Side effects from increased magnesium intake are not common. The body generally removes excess amounts. Magnesium excess almost always occurs only when a person is taking in too much of the mineral in supplement form. Although you may not get enough magnesium from your diet, it is rare to be truly deficient in magnesium. The symptoms of such a deficiency include: Hyperexcitability Muscle weakness Sleepiness  Deficiency of magnesium can occur in people who abuse alcohol or in those who absorb less magnesium due to: Burns Certain medications Low blood levels of calcium Problems absorbing nutrients from the intestinal tract ( malabsorption ) Surgery  Symptoms due to a lack of magnesium have three categories. Early symptoms: Anorexia Apathy Confusion Fatigue Insomnia Irritability Muscle twitching Poor memory Reduced ability to learn  Moderate deficiency symptoms: Heart (cardiovascular) changes Rapid heartbeat  Severe deficiency: Continued muscle contraction Delirium Numbness Seeing or hearing things that aren't there (hallucinations) Tingling  Recommendations 
 
 These are the recommended daily requirements of magnesium: Infants: Birth to 6 months: 30 mg/day* 6 months to 1 year: 75 mg/day*  *AI or Adequate Intake Children:  1 to 3 years old: 80 milligrams 4 to 8 years old: 130 milligrams 9 to 13 years old: 240 milligrams 14 to 18 years old (boys): 410 milligrams 14 to 18 years old (girls): 360 milligrams  Adults:  Adult females: 310 to 320 milligrams Pregnancy: 350 to 400 milligrams Breastfeeding women: 310 to 360 milligrams Adult males: 400 to 420 milligrams  Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - magnesium References 
 
 Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine.  DRI Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride . Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1997. PMID: 23115811  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23115811 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health.  Dietary Supplement Fact Sheet: Magnesium .  ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-Consumer . Accessed March 17, 2015. Yu ASL. Disorders of magnesium and phosphorus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 121. 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Minerals 
 Browse the Encyclopedia