
 Malabsorption 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Malabsorption involves problems with the body's ability to take in nutrients from food. Causes 
 
 Many diseases can cause malabsorption. Most often, malabsorption involves problems absorbing certain sugars, fats, proteins, or vitamins. It can also involve an overall problem with absorbing food. Problems or damage to the small intestine that may lead to problems absorbing important nutrients. These include: Celiac disease Crohn disease Damage from  radiation  treatments Overgrowth of bacteria in the small bowel Parasite or tapeworm infection Surgery that removes all or part of the small intestine Enzymes produced by the pancreas help absorb fats and other nutrients. A decrease of these enzymes makes it harder to absorb fats and certain nutrients. Problems with the pancreas may be caused by: Cystic fibrosis Infections or swelling of the pancreas Trauma to the pancreas Surgery to remove part of the pancreas Some of the other causes of malabsorption include: AIDS  and HIV Certain medicines (tetracycline, some antacids, some medicines used to treat obesity, colchicine, acarbose, phenytoin) Gastrectomy  and  surgical treatments for obesity Cholestasis Chronic liver disease Cow's milk protein intolerance Soy milk protein intolerance Symptoms 
 
 In children, current weight or rate of weight gain is often much lower than that of other children of similar age and gender. This is called  failure to thrive . The child may not grow and develop normally. Adults may also have failure to thrive, with weight loss, muscle wasting, weakness, and even problems thinking. Changes in the stools are often present, but not always. Changes in the stools may include: Bloating, cramping, and gas Bulky stools Chronic diarrhea Fatty stools (steatorrhea) Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do an exam. Tests that may be done include: Blood and urine tests CT scan of the abdomen Hydrogen breath test MR or CT enterography Schilling test  for vitamin B12 deficiency Secretin stimulation test Small bowel biopsy Stool culture  or  culture of small intestine aspirate Stool fat testing X-rays of the small bowel or other imaging tests  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause and is aimed at relieving symptoms and ensuring the body receives enough nutrients. A high-calorie diet may be tried. It should supply: Key vitamins and minerals, such as  iron , folic acid, and  vitamin B12 Enough carbohydrates, proteins, and fats If needed, injections of some vitamins and minerals or special growth factors will be given. Those with damage to the pancreas may need to take pancreatic enzymes. Your provider will prescribe these if necessary. Medicines to slow down the normal movement of the intestine can be tried. This may allow food to remain in the intestine longer If the body is not able to absorb enough nutrients,  total parenteral nutrition (TPN)  is tried. It will help you or your child get nutrition from a special formula through a vein in the body. Your provider will select the right amount of calories and TPN solution. Sometimes, you can also eat and drink while getting nutrition from TPN. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on what is causing the malabsorption.  Possible Complications 
 
 Long-term malabsorption can result in: Anemia Gallstones Kidney stones Thin and weakened bones When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of malabsorption. Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the condition causing malabsorption. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Högenauer C, Hammer HF. Maldigestion and malabsorption. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 104. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome 
 Biliary atresia 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Failure to thrive 
 Giardia infection 
 Hookworm infection 
 Lactose intolerance 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Whipple disease 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia