
 Malaise 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Malaise is a general feeling of discomfort, illness, or lack of well-being. Considerations 
 
 Malaise is a symptom that can occur with almost any health condition. It may start slowly or quickly, depending on the type of disease. Fatigue  (feeling tired) occurs with malaise in many diseases. You can have a feeling of not having enough energy to do your usual activities. Causes 
 
 The following lists give examples of the diseases, conditions, and medicines that can cause malaise. SHORT-TERM (ACUTE) INFECTIOUS DISEASE Acute bronchitis or  pneumonia Acute viral syndrome Infectious mononucleosis  (EBV) Influenza Lyme disease LONG-TERM (CHRONIC) INFECTIOUS DISEASE AIDS Chronic active  hepatitis Disease caused by parasites Tuberculosis HEART AND LUNG (CARDIOPULMONARY) DISEASE Congestive heart failure COPD ORGAN FAILURE Acute or chronic kidney disease Acute or chronic  liver disease CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE Rheumatoid arthritis Sarcoidosis Systemic lupus erythematosus ENDOCRINE or METABOLIC DISEASE Adrenal gland  dysfunction Diabetes Pituitary gland dysfunction (rare) Thyroid disease  CANCER Leukemia Lymphoma (cancer that starts in the  lymph system ) Solid tumor cancers, such as  colon cancer BLOOD DISORDERS Severe  anemia PSYCHIATRIC Depression Dysthymia MEDICINES Anticonvulsant (antiseizure) medicines Antihistamines Beta blockers (medicines used to treat heart disease or high blood pressure) Psychiatric medicines Treatments involving several medicines  Home Care 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you have severe malaise.  When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have other symptoms with the malaise Malaise lasts longer than one week, with or without other symptoms  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions such as: How long has this feeling lasted (weeks or months)? What other symptoms do you have? Is the malaise constant or episodic (comes and goes)? Can you complete your daily activities? If not, what limits you? Have you traveled recently? What medicines are you on? What are your other medical problems? Do you use alcohol or other drugs?  You may have tests to confirm the diagnosis if your provider thinks the problem may be due to an illness. These may include blood tests, x-rays, or other diagnostic tests. Your provider will recommend treatment if needed based on your exam and tests.  Alternative Names 
 
 General ill feeling References 
 
 Leggett J. Approach to fever or suspected infection in the normal host. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 288. Simel DL. Approach to the patient: history and physical examination. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 6. Read More 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Fatigue 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia