
 Malignant otitis externa 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Malignant otitis externa is a disorder that involves infection and damage of the bones of the ear canal and at the base of the skull. Causes 
 
 Malignant otitis externa is caused by the spread of an outer ear infection (otitis externa) also called swimmer's ear. It is not common. Risks for this condition include: Chemotherapy Diabetes 
  Weakened immune system
   External otitis is often caused by bacteria that are hard to treat, such as pseudomonas. The infection spreads from the floor of the ear canal to the nearby tissues and into the bones at the base of the skull. The infection and swelling may damage or destroy the bones. The infection may affect the cranial nerves, brain, or other parts of the body if it continues to spread. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Ongoing  drainage from the ear  that is yellow or green and smells bad. Ear pain  deep inside the ear. Pain may get worse when you move your head. Hearing loss . Itching  of the ear or ear canal. Fever. Trouble swallowing. Weakness in the muscles of the face. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look into your ear for signs of an outer ear infection. The head around and behind the ear may be tender to touch. A nervous system (neurological) exam may show that the cranial nerves are affected. If there is any drainage, the provider may send a sample of it to the lab. The lab will culture the sample to try to find the cause of the infection.  To look for signs of a  bone infection  next to the ear canal, the following tests may be done: CT scan of the head MRI scan of the head Radionuclide scan  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection. Treatment often lasts for several months, because it is difficult to treat the bacteria and reach an infection in bone tissue. You will need to take antibiotic medicines for a long period of time. The medicines may be given through a vein (intravenously), or by mouth. Antibiotics should be continued until scans or other tests show the inflammation has gone down. Surgery to remove dead or damaged tissue (surgical debridement) in the skull may be needed in some cases.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Malignant otitis externa most often responds to long-term treatment, especially if treated early. It may return in the future. Severe cases may be deadly. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Damage to the cranial nerves, skull, or brain Return of infection, even after treatment Spread of infection to the brain or other parts of the body When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of malignant otitis externa. Symptoms continue despite treatment. You develop new symptoms. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have: Convulsions Decreased consciousness 
   Severe  confusion 
   Facial weakness, loss of voice, or difficulty swallowing associated with ear pain or drainage
    Prevention 
 
 To prevent an external ear infection: 
   Dry the ear thoroughly after it gets wet.
    
   Avoid swimming in polluted water.
    
   Protect the ear canal with cotton or lamb's wool while applying hair spray or hair dye (if you are prone to getting external ear infections).
    
   After swimming, place 1 or 2 drops of a mixture of 50% alcohol and 50% vinegar in each ear to help dry the ear and prevent infection.
    Treat acute otitis externa completely. Do not stop treatment sooner than your provider recommends. Following your provider's plan and finishing treatment will lower your risk of malignant otitis externa. Alternative Names 
 
 Osteomyelitis of the skull; Otitis externa - malignant Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 References 
 
 Brant JA, Rickenstein MJ. Infections of the external ear. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 137. Pfaff JA, Moore GP. Otolaryngology. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Swimmer's ear  
 
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia