
 Malignant hypertension 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Malignant hypertension is very  high blood pressure  that comes on suddenly and quickly. Causes 
 
 The disorder affects a small number of people with high blood pressure, including children and adults. It is more common in younger adults, especially African American men. It also occurs in people with: Collagen vascular disorders (such as systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, and periarteritis nodosa) Kidney problems Pregnancy-induced high blood pressure ( toxemia ) You are at high risk for malignant hypertension if you have had: Kidney failure Renal hypertension  caused by renal artery stenosis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of malignant hypertension include: Blurred vision Change in mental status, such as:  anxiety ,  confusion ,  decreased alertness , decreased ability to concentrate,  fatigue , restlessness ,  sleepiness , or  stupor Chest pain  (feeling of crushing or pressure) Cough Headache Nausea or vomiting Numbness  of the arms, legs, face, or other areas Reduced urine  output Seizure Shortness of breath Weakness  of the arms, legs, face, or other areas  Exams and Tests 
 
 Malignant hypertension is a medical emergency. A physical exam commonly shows: Extremely high blood pressure Swelling in the lower legs and feet Abnormal heart sounds and fluid in the lungs Changes in thinking, sensation, and reflexes  An eye examination will reveal changes that indicate high blood pressure, including: Bleeding of the retina (back part of the eye) Narrowing of the blood vessels in the retina Swelling of the optic nerve Other problems with the  retina Kidney failure, as well as other complications, may develop. Tests to determine damage to the kidneys may include: Arterial blood gas analysis BUN  (blood urea nitrogen) Creatinine Urinalysis A  chest x-ray  may show congestion in the lungs and an enlarged heart. This disease may also affect the results of these tests: Level of  aldosterone  (a hormone from the adrenal gland) Cardiac enzymes (markers of heart damage) CT scan of the brain Electrocardiogram  (EKG) Renin  level Urinary sediment  Treatment 
 
 You will need to stay in the hospital until your severe high blood pressure is under control. You will receive medicines through a vein (IV) to reduce your blood pressure. If there is fluid in your lungs, you will be given medicines called diuretics, which help the body remove fluid. Your doctor may give you medicines to protect your heart if you have signs of heart damage. After your severe high blood pressure is under control, blood pressure medicines taken by mouth can control blood pressure. Your medicine may need to be changed sometimes. High blood pressure can be difficult to control. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many body systems are at serious risk from the extreme rise in blood pressure. Organs including the brain, eyes, blood vessels, heart, and kidneys may be damaged. The blood vessels of the kidney are very likely to be damaged by high blood pressure. Kidney failure may develop, which may be permanent. If this happens, you may need  dialysis  (machine that removes waste products from blood). If treated right away, malignant hypertension can often be controlled without causing permanent problems. If it is not treated right away, complications may be severe and life-threatening. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur: Brain damage (stroke, seizures) Heart damage, including:  heart attack ,  angina  (chest pain due to narrowed blood vessels or weakened heart muscle), heart rhythm disturbances Kidney failure Permanent blindness Fluid in the lungs When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call your local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of malignant hypertension. This is an emergency condition that can be life-threatening. Call your health care provider if you know you have poorly controlled high blood pressure. Prevention 
 
 If you have high blood pressure, carefully monitor your blood pressure and take your medicines properly to help reduce your risk. Eat a healthy diet that is low in salt and fat. Alternative Names 
 
 Accelerated hypertension; Arteriolar nephrosclerosis; Nephrosclerosis - arteriolar; Hypertension - malignant; High blood pressure - malignant Images 
 
 
 Hypertensive kidney 
 References 
 
 Badr KF, Brenner BM. Vascular injury to the kidney. In: Fauci A , Kasper D, Longo DL, et al, eds.  Harrison's Principals of Internal Medicine . 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2008:chap 280. Linas SL. Hypertensive crisis: emergency and urgency. In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88. Shayne P, Lynch CA. Hypertensive crisis. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 69. Shayne P, Stettner E. Hypertension. In: Wolfson AB, Hendey GW, Ling LJ, et al, eds.  Harwood-Nuss' Clinical Practice of Emergency Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Angina 
 Heart attack 
 Preeclampsia 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Renovascular hypertension 
 Seizures 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 5/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in Nephrology, Affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 High Blood Pressure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia