
 Malignant teratoma of the mediastinum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A teratoma is a type of cancer that contains one or more of the three layers of cells found in a developing baby (embryo). These cells are called germ cells. A teratoma is one type of germ cell tumor. The mediastinum is located inside the front of the chest in the area that separates the lungs. The heart, large blood vessels, windpipe, thymus gland, and esophagus are found there. Causes 
 
 Malignant mediastinal teratoma occurs most often in young men in their 20s or 30s. Most malignant teratomas can spread throughout the body, and have spread by the time of diagnosis. Other cancers are often associated with this tumor, including: Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma T-cell lymphoma (a type of blood cancer) Myelodysplactic syndromes (group of bone marrow disorders) Small cell carcinoma (a type of cancer that grows and spreads rapidly) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Chest pain or pressure Cough Fatigue Limited ability to tolerate exercise Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. The exam may reveal a blockage of the veins entering the center of the chest due to increased pressure in the chest area. The following tests help diagnose the tumor: Chest x-ray CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis Blood tests to check beta-HCG,  alpha fetoprotein  (AFP), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels Mediastinoscopy with biopsy Treatment 
 
 Chemotherapy  is used to treat the tumor. A combination of medicines (usually cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin) is commonly used. After chemotherapy is complete, CT scans are taken again to see if any of the tumor remains. Surgery may be recommended if there is a risk that the cancer will grow back in that area or if any cancer has been left behind. Support Groups 
 
 There are many support groups available for people with cancer. Contact the American Cancer Society --  www.cancer.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the tumor size and location and the age of the patient. Possible Complications 
 
 The cancer can spread throughout the body and there may be complications of surgery or related to chemotherapy. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of malignant teratoma. Alternative Names 
 
 Dermoid cyst - malignant; Nonseminomatous germ cell tumor - teratoma; Immature teratoma; GCTs - teratoma; Teratoma - extragonadal Images 
 
 
 Teratoma - MRI scan 
 Malignant teratoma 
 References 
 
 Cheng G, Varghese TK, Park DR. Mediastinal tumors and cysts. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 83. Putnam JB. Lung, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 57. Read More 
 
 Cyst 
 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia