
 Marijuana intoxication 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Marijuana ("pot") intoxication is the euphoria, relaxation, and sometimes undesirable side effects that can occur when people use marijuana. Marijuana is the most commonly used illegal drug in the United States. The drug is usually smoked, but is sometimes eaten. Symptoms 
 
 The intoxicating effects of  marijuana  include relaxation, sleepiness, and mild euphoria (getting high). Smoking marijuana leads to fast and predictable signs and symptoms. Eating marijuana can cause slower, and sometimes less predictable effects. Marijuana can cause undesirable side effects, which increase with higher doses. These side effects include: Decreased short-term memory Dry mouth Impaired perception and motor skills Red eyes More serious side effects include panic, paranoia, or acute  psychosis , which may be more common with new users or in those who already have a psychiatric disease. The degree of these side effects varies from person to person, as well as with the amount of marijuana used. Marijuana is often cut with hallucinogens and other, more dangerous drugs that have more serious side effects than marijuana. These side effects may include: Sudden  high blood pressure  with headache Chest pain and heart rhythm disturbances Extreme hyperactivity and physical violence Heart attack Seizures Stroke Sudden collapse (cardiac arrest) Treatment 
 
 Treatment and care involves: Preventing injury Reassuring those who have panic reactions due to the drug Sedatives called benzodiazepines, such as diazepam (Valium) or lorazepam (Ativan) may be given. Children who have more serious symptoms or those with serious side effects may need to stay in the hospital for treatment. Treatment may include heart and brain monitoring. In the emergency department the patient may receive: Activated charcoal if the drug has been eaten Blood and urine tests Breathing support Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous, or IV) Medicines to relieve symptoms (see above) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 








Uncomplicated marijuana intoxication rarely needs medical advice or treatment. Occasionally, serious symptoms occur. However, these symptoms are rare and usually associated with other drugs or compounds mixed in with marijuana.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If someone who has been using marijuana develops any of the symptoms of intoxication, has trouble breathing, or cannot be awakened, call 911 or your local emergency number. If the person has stopped breathing or has no pulse, begin cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and continue it until help arrives. Alternative Names 
 
 Cannabis intoxication; Intoxication - marijuana (cannabis); Pot; Mary Jane; Weed; Grass; Cannabis References 
 
 Ly BT, Williams SR. Hallucinogens. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 156. Read More 
 
 Drug use first aid 
 Substance use 
 Substance use disorder 
 
 Review Date 1/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Marijuana 
 Browse the Encyclopedia