
 Mastoiditis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mastoiditis is an infection of the mastoid bone of the skull. The mastoid is located just behind the ear. Causes 
 
 Mastoiditis is most often caused by a middle ear infection ( acute otitis media ). The infection may spread from the ear to the mastoid bone. The bone has a honeycomb-like structure that fills with infected material and may break down.  The condition is most common in children. Before antibiotics, mastoiditis was one of the leading causes of death in children. The condition does not occur very often today. It is also much less dangerous.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Drainage from the ear Ear pain or discomfort Fever, may be high or suddenly increase Headache Hearing loss Redness of the ear or behind the ear Swelling behind ear, may cause ear to stick out Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam of the head may reveal signs of mastoiditis. The following tests may show an abnormality of the mastoid bone: CT scan  of the ear Head CT scan A culture of drainage from the ear may show bacteria. Treatment 
 
 Mastoiditis may be hard to treat because the medicine may not reach deeply into the bone. The condition sometimes requires repeated or long-term treatment. The infection is treated with antibiotic injections, followed by antibiotics taken by mouth.  Surgery to remove part of the bone and drain the mastoid ( mastoidectomy ) may be needed if antibiotic treatment does not work. Surgery to drain the middle ear through the eardrum ( myringotomy ) may be needed to treat the middle ear infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Mastoiditis can be cured. However, it may be hard to treat and may come back. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Destruction of the mastoid bone Dizziness  or vertigo Epidural abscess Facial paralysis Meningitis Partial or complete  hearing loss Spread of infection to the brain or throughout the body When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of mastoiditis. Also call if: You have an  ear infection  that does not respond to treatment or is followed by new symptoms. Your symptoms do not respond to treatment. Prevention 
 
 Prompt and thorough treatment of ear infections reduces the risk for mastoiditis. Images 
 
 
 Mastoiditis - side view of head 
 Mastoiditis - redness and swelling behind ear 
 Mastoidectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Chole RA. Chronic otitis media, mastoiditis, and petrositis. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 139. Klein JO. Otitis externa, otitis media, and mastoiditis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. O'Handley JG, Tobin EJ, Shah AR. Otorhinolaryngology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Ear infection - acute 
 Epidural abscess 
 Facial paralysis 
 Hearing loss 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia