
 McArdle disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 McArdle disease is a rare inherited condition in which the body is not able to break down glycogen. Glycogen is an important source of energy that is stored in all tissues, especially in the muscles and liver. McArdle disease is also called type V glycogen storage disease. Causes 
 
 McArdle disease is caused by a flaw in the gene that makes an  enzyme  called glycogen phosphorylase. As a result, the body cannot break down glycogen in the muscles. The disease is an  autosomal recessive  genetic disorder. This means that you must receive a copy of the nonworking gene from both parents. A person who receives a nonworking gene from only one parent usually does not develop this syndrome. A family history of McArdle disease increases the risk. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually start during early childhood. But, it may be difficult to separate these symptoms from those of normal childhood, and diagnosis may not occur until a person is over 20 or 30 years old.  Burgundy-colored urine (myoglobinuria) Fatigue Exercise intolerance, poor stamina Muscle cramps Muscle pain Muscle stiffness Muscle weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be performed: Electromyography (EMG) Genetic testing Lactic acid in blood MRI Muscle biopsy Myoglobin in urine Plasma ammonia Serum creatine kinase Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment. The health care provider may suggest the following to stay active and healthy and prevent symptoms: Be aware of your physical limitations. Before exercising, warm up gently. Avoid exercising too hard or too long. Eat enough protein. Ask your provider if it's a good idea to eat some sugar before exercising. This may help prevent muscle symptoms. If you need to have surgery, ask your provider if it's OK for you to have general anesthesia. Support Groups 
 
 The following groups can provide more information and resources: Association for Glycogen Storage Disease:  www.agsdus.org McArdlesDisease.org:  mcardlesdisease.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with McArdle disease can live a normal life by managing their diet and physical activity. Possible Complications 
 
 Exercise may produce muscle pain, or even a breakdown of skeletal muscle ( rhabdomyolysis ). This condition is associated with burgundy-colored urine and a risk for  kidney failure , if it is severe. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have repeated episodes of sore or cramped muscles after exercise, especially if you also have burgundy or pink urine. Consider genetic counseling if you have a family history of McArdle disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Glycogen storage disease type V (GSDV); Myophosphorylase deficiency; Muscle glycogen phosphorylase deficiency; PYGM deficiency References 
 
 Kishnani PS, Chen, YT. Defects in metabolism of carbohydrates. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 87. Weinstein DA. Glycogen storage diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 207. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia