
 Meckel's diverticulum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A Meckel's diverticulum is a pouch on the wall of the lower part of the intestine that is present at birth (congenital). The diverticulum may contain tissue similar to that of the stomach or pancreas. Causes 
 
 A Meckel's diverticulum is tissue left over from when the baby's digestive tract was forming before birth. A small number of people have a Meckel's diverticulum. However, only a few develop symptoms. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Pain in the abdomen that can be mild or severe Blood in the stool Nausea and vomiting Symptoms often occur during the first few years of life. However, they may not start until adulthood. Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have the following tests: Hematocrit Hemoglobin Stool smear for invisible blood ( stool occult blood test ) CT scan Technetium scan  (also called a Meckel's scan) Treatment 
 
 You may need surgery to remove the diverticulum if bleeding develops. The segment of small intestine that contains the diverticulum is taken out. The ends of the intestine are sewn back together. You may need to take iron supplements to treat anemia. You may need a blood transfusion if you have a lot of bleeding,  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people recover fully with surgery.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Excess bleeding (hemorrhage) from the diverticulum Folding of the intestines ( intussusception ), a type of blockage Peritonitis Tear (perforation) of the bowel at the diverticulum  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider right away if your child passes blood or bloody stool or has ongoing abdominal pain. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 Meckel's diverticulectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Kahn E, Daum F. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the small and large intestine. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 96. Read More 
 
 Diverticulitis 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Intussusception - children 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia