
 Mediastinal tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mediastinal tumors are growths that form in the mediastinum. This is an area in the middle of the chest that separates the lungs. Causes 
 
 The mediastinum is the part of the chest that lies between the sternum and the spinal column, and between the lungs. This area contains the heart, large blood vessels, windpipe (trachea), thymus gland, esophagus, and connective tissues. The mediastinum is divided into 3 sections: 
  Anterior (front)
   
  Middle
   
  Posterior (back)
   Mediastinal tumors are rare. The common location for tumors in the mediastinum depends on the age of the person. In children, tumors are more common in the posterior mediastinum. These tumors often begin in the nerves and are non-cancerous (benign). Most mediastinal tumors in adults occur in the anterior mediastinum. They are usually cancerous (malignant) lymphomas, germ cell tumors, or thymomas. These tumors are most common in middle aged and older adults. Symptoms 
 
 Almost one half of mediastinal tumors cause no symptoms and are found on a  chest x-ray  done for another reason. Symptoms that do occur are due to pressure on (compression of) local structures and may include: Chest pain Fever  and  chills Cough Coughing up blood  (hemoptysis) Hoarseness Night sweats Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 A medical history and physical examination may show: Fever High-pitched breathing sound ( stridor ) Swollen or tender lymph nodes ( lymphadenopathy ) Unintentional weight loss Wheezing Further tests that may be done include: Chest x-ray CT-guided needle biopsy CT scan of the chest Mediastinoscopy with biopsy MRI of the chest Treatment 
 
 Treatment for mediastinal tumors depends on the type of tumor and symptoms: Thymic cancers are treated with surgery. It may be followed by radiation or chemotherapy, depending on the stage of the tumor and the success of the surgery. Germ cell tumors are usually treated with chemotherapy. For lymphomas,  chemotherapy  is the treatment of choice, and is possibly followed by  radiation . For neurogenic tumors of the posterior mediastinum, surgery is the main treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the type of tumor. Different tumors respond differently to chemotherapy and radiation. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of mediastinal tumors include: Spinal cord compression Spread to nearby structures such as the heart, lining around the heart (pericardium), and great vessels (aorta and vena cava) Radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy can all have serious complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice symptoms of a mediastinal tumor. Alternative Names 
 
 Thymoma - mediastinal; Lymphoma - mediastinal Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 References 
 
 Cheng GS, Varghese TK, Park DR. Mediastinal tumors and cysts. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 83. Mccool FD. Diseases of the diaphragm, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 99. 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chest Injuries and Disorders 
 Lymphoma 
 Thymus Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia