
 Mediastinitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mediastinitis is swelling and irritation (inflammation) of the chest area between the lungs (mediastinum). This area contains the heart, large blood vessels, windpipe (trachea), food tube (esophagus), thymus gland, lymph nodes, and connective tissues. Causes 
 
 Mediastinitis usually results from an infection. It may occur suddenly ( acute ), or it may develop slowly and get worse over time ( chronic ). It most often occurs in person who recently had an upper endoscopy or chest surgery. A person may have a tear in their esophagus that causes mediastinitis. Causes of the tear include: A procedure such as  endoscopy Forceful or constant  vomiting Trauma Other causes of mediastinitis include: A fungal infection called  histoplasmosis Radiation Inflammation of the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, eyes, skin, or other tissues ( sarcoidosis ) Tuberculosis Breathing in anthrax Cancer Risk factors include: Disease of the esophagus Diabetes mellitus Problems in the upper gastrointestinal tract Recent chest surgery or endoscopy Weakened immune system Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Chest pain Chills Fever General discomfort Shortness of breath Signs of mediastinitis in people who have had recent surgery include: Chest wall tenderness Wound drainage Unstable chest wall Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms and medical history.  Tests may include: Chest CT scan  or  MRI scan Chest x-ray Ultrasound The provider may insert a needle into the area of inflammation and remove a sample to send for  gram stain  and  culture  to determine the type of infection, if present. Treatment 
 
 You may receive antibiotics if you have an infection. You may need surgery to remove the area of inflammation if the blood vessels, windpipe, or esophagus is blocked. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the cause and severity of the mediastinitis. Mediastinitis after chest surgery is very serious. There is a risk of dying from the condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include the following: Spread of the infection to the bloodstream, blood vessels, bones, heart, or lungs Scarring Scarring can be severe, especially when it is caused by chronic mediastinitis. Scarring can interfere with heart or lung function. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have had open chest surgery and develop: Chest pain Chills Drainage from the wound Fever Shortness of breath If you have a lung infection or sarcoidosis and develop any of these symptoms, see your provider right away. Prevention 
 
 To lessen the risk of developing mediastinits related to chest surgery, surgical wounds should be  kept clean and dry  after surgery. Treating tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, or other conditions associated with mediastinitis may prevent this complication. Alternative Names 
 
 Chest infection Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Cheng GS, Varghese TK, Park DR. Pneumomediastinum and mediastinitis. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 84. Van Schooneveld TC, Rupp ME. Mediastinitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 87. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Cancer 
 Chronic 
 Endoscopy 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chest Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia