
 Melasma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Melasma are patches of dark skin that appear on areas of the face that are exposed to the sun. Causes 
 
 Melasma is a common skin disorder. It most often appears in young women with brownish skin tone, but it can affect anyone. Melasma is often associated with the female hormones estrogen and progesterone. It is common in: Pregnant women Women taking birth control pills ( oral contraceptives ) Women taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT) during menopause.  Being in the sun makes melasma more likely to develop. The problem is more common in tropical climates. Symptoms 
 
 The only symptom of melasma is a change in skin color. However, this color change can cause distress about your appearance. The skin color changes are most often an even brown color. They usually appear on the cheeks, forehead, nose, or upper lip. Dark patches are usually symmetrical. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at your skin to diagnose the problem. A closer exam using a device called a  Wood's lamp  (which uses ultraviolet light) may help guide your treatment. Treatment 
 
 Treatments may include: Creams that contain certain substances to improve the appearance of melasma Chemical peels or topical steroid creams Laser treatments to remove the dark pigment if melasma is severe Stopping hormone medicines that may be causing the problem Medicines taken by mouth Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Melasma often fades over several months after you stop taking hormone medicines or your pregnancy ends. The problem may come back in future pregnancies or if you use these medicines again. It may also come back from sun exposure.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have darkening of your face that does not go away. Prevention 
 
 Use a broad spectrum high SPF sunscreen every day to prevent melasma. Sunscreen use also helps prevent skin cancer and wrinkles. Alternative Names 
 
 Chloasma; Mask of pregnancy; Pregnancy mask References 
 
 Habif TP. Light-related diseases and disorders of pigmentation. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 19. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Disturbances of pigmentation. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 36. 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pregnancy 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia