
 Meningitis - tuberculous 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tuberculous meningitis is an infection of the tissues covering the brain and spinal cord (meninges). Causes 
 
 Tuberculous meningitis is caused by  Mycobacterium tuberculosis . This is the bacteria that causes tuberculosis ( TB ). The bacteria spread to the brain and spine from another place in the body. Tuberculous meningitis is very rare in the U.S. Most cases are people who travelled to the U.S. from other countries where TB is common. People who have the following have a higher chance of developing tuberculous meningitis: HIV/AIDS Drink  alcohol in excess Pulmonary tuberculosis Weakened immune system  Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms often start slowly, and may include: Fever and chills Mental status changes Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) Severe headache Stiff neck (meningismus)  Other symptoms that can occur with this disease may include: Agitation Bulging fontanelles  in babies Decreased consciousness Poor feeding or irritability in children Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards ( opisthotonos )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. This will usually show that you have the following: Fast heart rate Fever Mental status changes Stiff neck  A lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) is an important test in diagnosing meningitis. It is done to collect a sample of spinal fluid for examination. More than one sample may be needed to make the diagnosis. Other tests that may be done include: Biopsy  of the brain or meninges Blood culture Chest x-ray CSF examination for cell count, glucose, and protein CT scan of the head Gram stain, other special stains, and  culture of CSF Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of CSF Skin test for tuberculosis ( PPD ) Other tests to look for tuberculosis  Treatment 
 
 You will be given several medicines to fight the tuberculosis bacteria. Sometimes, treatment is started even if your doctor thinks you have the disease, but testing has not confirmed it yet.  Treatment usually lasts for at least 12 months. Medicines called coticosteroids may also be used. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Tuberculous meningitis is life-threatening if untreated. Long-term follow-up is needed to detect repeated infections (recurrences). Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, the disease can cause any of the following: Brain damage Build-up of fluid between the skull and brain ( subdural effusion ) Hearing loss Hydrocephalus Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms: Feeding problems High-pitched cry Irritability Persistent unexplained fever  Call the local emergency number if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness. Prevention 
 
 Treating people who have signs of a non-active (dormant) tuberculosis infection can prevent the spread of tuberculosis. A PPD test and other tuberculosis tests can be done to tell if you have this type of infection. Some countries with a high incidence of TB give people a vaccine called BCG to prevent TB. But, the effectiveness of this vaccine is limited and it is not usually used in the United States. The BCG vaccine may help prevent severe forms of tuberculosis, such as meningitis, in very young children who live in areas where the disease is common. Alternative Names 
 
 Tubercular meningitis; TB meningitis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Ellner JJ. Tuberculosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 332. Fitzgerald DW, Sterling TR, Haas DW. Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 251. Swartz MN. Meningitis: bacterial, viral, and other. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 360. Thwaites GE, van Toorn R, Schoeman J. Tuberculous meningitis: more questions, still too few answers.  Lancet Neurol . 213;12:999-1010. PMID: 23972913  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23972913 . Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Muscle function loss 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia