
 Meningitis - cryptococcal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cryptococcal  meningitis  is a fungal infection of the tissues covering the brain and spinal cord. These tissues are called meninges. Causes 
 
 Most cryptococcal meningitis is caused by the fungus  Cryptococcus neoformans . This fungus is found in soil around the world. Another type of  Cryptococcus  can also cause meningitis, but it will not be disscussed here. Cryptococcal meningitis most often affects people with a weakened immune system, including people with: AIDS Cirrhosis (a type of liver disease) Diabetes Leukemia Lymphoma Sarcoidosis An organ transplant  It is rare in people who have a normal immune system and no long-term health problems. Symptoms 
 
 This form of meningitis starts slowly, over a few days to a few weeks. Symptoms may include: Fever Hallucinations Headache Mental status change  (confusion) Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to light Stiff neck  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. You will likely have a: Fast heart rate Fever Mental status change Stiff neck  A lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) is an important test for diagnosing meningitis. In this test, a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is removed from your spine and tested. Other tests that may be done include: Blood culture Chest x-ray Cryptococcal antigen in CSF or blood, to look for antibodies CSF examination for cell count, glucose, and protein CT scan of the head Gram stain, other special stains, and  culture of CSF Treatment 
 
 Antifungal medicines are used to treat this form of meningitis.  Intravenous  (IV, through a vein) therapy with amphotericin B is the most common treatment. It is often combined with an oral antifungal medicine called 5-flucytosine. Another oral medication, fluconazole, in high doses may also be effective against this infection, and may be prescribed later. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who recover from cryptococcal meningitis need long-term treatment with medication to prevent the infection from coming back. People with weakened immune systems, such as people with AIDs, will also need long-term treatment to improve their immune system. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur from this infection: Brain damage Hearing loss Hydrocephalus  (excessive CSF in the brain) Seizures Amphotericin B can have side effects, including chills and stiffness, and sometimes kidney damage. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your local emergency number (such as 911) if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness. Call your local emergency number or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has these symptoms: Feeding difficulties High-pitched cry Irritability Persistent, unexplained fever  Alternative Names 
 
 Cryptococcal meningitis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Kauffman CA. Cryptococcosis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 344. Thigpen MC, Whitney CG, Messonnier NE, et al. Emerging Infections Programs Network. Bacterial meningitis in the United States, 1998-2007.  N Engl J Med . 2011 May 26;364(21):2016-2025. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Hydrocephalus 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia