
 Meningitis - staphylococcal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Meningitis is an infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. This covering is called the meninges. Bacteria are one type of germ that may cause meningitis. The staphylococcal bacteria is one type of bacteria that causes meningitis. Causes 
 
 Staphylococcal meningitis is caused by staphylococcus bacteria. When it is caused by  Staphylococcus aureus  or  Staphylococcus epidermidis  bacteria, it usually develops as a complication of surgery or as an infection that spreads through the blood from another site. Risk factors include: Infections of heart valves Past infection of the brain Past meningitis due to spinal fluid shunts Recent brain surgery Spinal fluid shunt Trauma  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may come on quickly, and include: 
   Fever and chills Mental status changes Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) Severe headache Stiff neck  Other symptoms that can occur with this disease: Agitation Bulging fontanelles  in infants Decreased alertness Poor feeding or irritability in children Rapid breathing Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards ( opisthotonos )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Questions will focus on symptoms and risk factors. If the doctor thinks meningitis is possible, a lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) is done to remove a sample of spinal fluid for testing. If you have a spinal fluid shunt, the sample may be taken from this instead.  Tests may include: Blood culture Chest x-ray CT scan of the head Gram stain, other special stains, and  culture of CSF Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics will be started as soon as possible. Vancomycin is the first choice for suspected staphylococcal meningitis. Nafcillin is sometimes used instead.  Often, treatment will include a search for, and removal of, possible sources of bacteria in the body. These include shunts or artificial heart valves. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Early treatment improves the outcome. However, some people do not survive. Young children and adults over age 50 have the highest risk for death. Staphylococcal meningitis often improves more quickly, with fewer complications, if the source of the infection is removed. The source may include shunts, hardware in joints, or artificial heart valves. Possible Complications 
 
 Long-term complications may include: Brain damage Buildup of fluid between the skull and brain ( subdural effusion ) Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling ( hydrocephalus )  Hearing loss Seizures Staph infection  in another area of the body When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms: Feeding problems High-pitched cry Irritability Persistent, unexplained fever Call the local emergency number if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness. Prevention 
 
 In high-risk people, taking preventive antibiotics before diagnostic or surgical procedures may help reduce the risk. Discuss this with your doctor. Alternative Names 
 
 Staphylococcal meningitis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Nath A. Meningitis: bacterial, viral, and other. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 412. Tunkel AR, Van de Beek D, Scheld WM. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Meningitis 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia