
 Meningitis - gram-negative 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Meningitis is present when the membranes covering of the brain and spinal cord become swollen and inflamed. This covering is called the meninges. Bacteria are one type of germ that may cause  meningitis . Gram-negative bacteria are a type of bacteria that behave in a similar manner in the body. They turn pink when tested in the laboratory with a special stain called Gram stain. Causes 
 
 Acute bacterial meningitis can be caused by different Gram-negative bacteria including  meningococcal  and  H influenzae . This article covers Gram-negative meningitis caused by the following bacteria: Escherichia coli Klebsiella pneumoniae Pseudomonas aeruginosa Serratia marsescens Gram-negative meningitis is more common in infants than adults. But it can also occur in adults, especially those with one or more risk factors. Risk factors in adults and children include: Infection Recent brain surgery Recent  injury to the head Spinal abnormalities Spinal fluid  shunt  placement after brain surgery Urinary tract abnormalities Urinary tract infection Weakened immune system Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually come on quickly, and may include: Fever  and chills Mental status changes Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) Severe headache Stiff neck (meningismus) Symptoms of a bladder, kidney, intestine, or lung infection Other symptoms that can occur with this disease: Agitation Bulging fontanelles  in infants Decreased consciousness Poor feeding or irritability in children Rapid breathing Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards ( opisthotonos ) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Questions will focus on symptoms and possible exposure to someone who might have the same symptoms, such as a stiff neck and fever. If the provider thinks meningitis is possible, a lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) will likely be done to remove a sample of spinal fluid for testing. Other tests that may be done include: Blood culture Chest x-ray CT scan of the head Gram stain, other special stains Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics will be started as soon as possible. Ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, and cefepime are the most commonly used antibiotics for this type of meningitis. Other antibiotics may be given, depending on the type of bacteria.  If you have a spinal shunt, it may be removed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The earlier treatment is started, the better the outcome. Many people recover completely. But, many people have permanent brain damage or die of this type of meningitis. Young children and adults over age 50 have the highest risk for death. How well you do depends on: Your age How soon treatment is started Your overall health Possible Complications 
 
 Long-term complications may include: Brain damage Buildup of fluid between the skull and brain ( subdural effusion ) Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling ( hydrocephalus ) Hearing loss Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms: Feeding problems High-pitched cry Irritability Persistent unexplained fever Call the local emergency number if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of related infections may reduce the risk of meningitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Gram-negative meningitis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Nath A. Meningitis: bacterial, viral, and other. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 412. Tunkel AR, Van de Beek D, Scheld WM. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Brain abscess 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Meningitis 
 Shock 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Ventriculoperitoneal shunting 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia