
 Meningitis - pneumococcal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Meningitis is an infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. This covering is called the meninges. Bacteria are one type of germ that can cause meningitis. The pneumococcal bacteria is one kind of bacteria that causes meningitis. Causes 
 
 Pneumococcal meningitis is caused by  Streptococcus pneumoniae  bacteria (also called pneumococcus, or  S pneumoniae ). This type of bacteria is the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in adults. It is the second most common cause of meningitis in children older than age 2. Risk factors include: Alcohol use Diabetes History of meningitis Infection of a heart valve with  S pneumoniae Injury or trauma to the head Meningitis in which there is leakage of spinal fluid Recent ear infection with  S pneumoniae Recent  pneumonia  with  S pneumoniae Recent upper respiratory infection Spleen removal or a spleen that does not function Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually come on quickly, and may include: Fever  and chills Mental status changes Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) Severe headache Stiff neck Other symptoms that can occur with this disease: Agitation Bulging fontanelles  in infants Decreased consciousness Poor feeding or irritability in children Rapid breathing Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards ( opisthotonos ) Pneumococcal meningitis is an important cause of fever in infants. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Questions will focus on symptoms and possible exposure to someone who might have the same symptoms, such as a stiff neck and fever. If the provider thinks meningitis is possible, a lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) will likely be done to remove a sample of spinal fluid for testing. Other tests that may be done include: Blood culture Chest x-ray CT scan of the head Gram stain, other special stains Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics will be started as soon as possible. Ceftriaxone is one of the most commonly used antibiotics. If the antibiotic is not working and the provider suspects antibiotic resistance, vancomycin or rifampin are used. Sometimes, corticosteroids are used, especially in children. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This is a dangerous infection and it can be deadly. The sooner it is treated, the better the chance for recovery. Young children and adults over age 50 have the highest risk for death. Possible Complications 
 
 Long-term complications may include: Brain damage Buildup of fluid between the skull and brain ( subdural effusion ) Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling ( hydrocephalus ) Hearing loss Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms: Feeding problems High-pitched cry Irritability Persistent unexplained fever Call the local emergency number if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness. Prevention 
 
 Early treatment of pneumonia and ear infections caused by pneumococcus may decrease the risk of meningitis. There are also  two effective vaccines  available to prevent pneumococcus infection. The following people should be vaccinated, according to current recommendations: Children Adults age 65 and older People at high risk for pneumococcus infection Alternative Names 
 
 Pneumococcal meningitis; Pneumococcus - meningitis Images 
 
 
 Pneumococci organism 
 Pneumococcal pneumonia 
 References 
 
 Tunkel AR, Van de Beek D, Scheld WM. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 89. Wood JB, Peters TR. Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 182. Read More 
 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Intellectual disability 
 Meningitis 
 Muscle function loss 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Pneumococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia