
 Metabolic acidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Metabolic acidosis is a condition in which there is too much acid in the body fluids. Causes 
 
 Metabolic acidosis occurs when the body produces too much acid. It can also occur when the kidneys are not removing enough acid from the body.  There are several types of metabolic acidosis. Diabetic acidosis develops when acidic substances, known as ketone bodies, build up in the body. This most often occurs with uncontrolled type 1 diabetes. It is also called  diabetic ketoacidosis  and DKA.  Hyperchloremic acidosis results from excessive loss of sodium bicarbonate from the body. This can occur with severe diarrhea. Lactic acidosis results from a buildup of lactic acid. It can be caused by:  Alcohol Cancer Exercising intensely Liver failure Medicines, such as salicylates Prolonged lack of oxygen from  shock ,  heart failure , or severe  anemia Seizures Other causes of metabolic acidosis include: Kidney disease (distal renal tubular acidosis and proximal renal tubular acidosis) Poisoning by aspirin, ethylene glycol (found in antifreeze), or methanol Severe  dehydration Symptoms 
 
 Most symptoms are caused by the underlying disease or condition that is causing the metabolic acidosis. Metabolic acidosis itself most often causes rapid breathing. Acting confused or very tired may also occur. Severe metabolic acidosis can lead to shock or death. In some situations, metabolic acidosis can be a mild, ongoing (chronic) condition. Exams and Tests 
 
 These tests can help diagnose acidosis. They can also determine whether the cause is a breathing problem or a metabolic problem. Tests may include: Arterial blood gas Basic metabolic panel, (a group of blood tests that measure your sodium and potassium levels, kidney function, and other chemicals and functions) Urine pH Urine ketones  or blood ketones Lactic acid test Arterial blood gas analysis  Other tests may be needed to determine the cause of the acidosis. Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the health problem causing the acidosis. In some cases, sodium bicarbonate (the chemical in baking soda) may be given to reduce the acidity of the blood. Often, you will receive lots of fluids through your vein. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook will depend on the underlying disease causing the condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Very severe metabolic acidosis can lead to shock or death. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical help if you have symptoms of any disease that can cause metabolic acidosis. Prevention 
 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis can be prevented by keeping  type 1 diabetes  under control. Alternative Names 
 
 Acidosis - metabolic Images 
 
 
 Insulin production and diabetes 
 References 
 
 Krapf R, Seldin DW, Alpern RJ. Clinical syndromes of metabolic acidosis. In: Alpern RJl, Orson WM, Caplan M, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 59. Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 118. 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia