
 Metastatic pleural tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Metastatic pleural tumor is a type of  cancer  that has spread from another organ to the thin membrane (pleura) surrounding the lungs. Causes 
 
 The blood and lymph systems can carry cancer cells to other organs in the body. There, they can produce new growths or tumors. Almost any type of cancer can spread to the lungs and involve the pleura. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest pain , especially when taking a deep breath Cough General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Shortness of breath Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest 
   Procedure to remove and examine the pleura ( open pleural biopsy ) 
   Test that examines a sample of fluid that has collected in the pleural space ( pleural fluid analysis ) 
   Procedure that uses a needle to remove a sample of the pleura ( pleural needle biopsy ) Removal of fluid from around the lungs ( thoracentesis )  Treatment 
 
 Pleural tumors usually can't be removed with surgery. The original (primary) cancer should be treated.  Chemotherapy  and  radiation therapy  may be used, depending on the type of primary cancer. Your provider may recommend thoracentesis if you have a lot of fluid collecting around your lungs and you have shortness of breath or low blood oxygen levels. After the fluid is removed, your lung will be able to expand more. This allows you to breathe easier. To prevent the fluid from collecting again, medicine may be placed directly into your chest space through a tube, called a catheter. Or, your surgeon may spray a medicine or talc on the lung surface during the procedure. This helps seal the space around your lungs to prevent the fluid from returning.  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The 5-year survival rate (number of people who live for more than 5 years after diagnosis) is less than 25% for people with pleural tumors that have spread from other parts of the body. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result include: Side effects of chemotherapy or radiation therapy Continued spread of the cancer  Prevention 
 
 Early detection and treatment of primary cancers may prevent metastatic pleural tumors in some people. Alternative Names 
 
 Tumor - metastatic pleural Images 
 
 
 Pleural space 
 References 
 
 Arenberg DA, Pickens A. Metastatic malignant tumors. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 55. Ripley RT, Rusch VW. Lung metastases. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 52. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Incidence 
 Pleural effusion 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Cancer 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia