
 Methamphetamine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Methamphetamine is a stimulant drug. A strong form of the drug is illegally sold on the streets. A much weaker form of the drug is used to treat narcolepsy and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This weaker form is sold as a prescription. Medicines that are legally used to treat cold symptoms, such as decongestants, can be made into methamphetamines. This article focuses on the illegal street drug. The street drug is usually a white crystal-like powder, called "crystal meth." This powder can be snorted up the nose, smoked, swallowed, or dissolved and injected into a vein. A methamphetamine  overdose  may be acute (sudden) or chronic (long-term). An acute methamphetamine overdose occurs when someone takes this drug by accident or on purpose and has side effects. These side effects can be life-threatening. A chronic methamphetamine overdose refers to the health effects in someone who uses the drug on a regular basis.  Injuries during illegal methamphetamine production or police raids include exposure to dangerous chemicals, as well as burns and explosions. All of these can cause serious, life-threatening injuries and conditions. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Methamphetamine Where Found 
 
 Methamphetamine is a common, illegal, drug sold on the streets. It may be called meth, crank, speed, crystal meth, and ice. A much weaker form of methamphetamine is sold as a prescription with the brand name Desoxyn. It is sometimes used to treat narcolepsy. Adderall, a brand name drug containing amphetamine, is used to treat ADHD.  Symptoms 
 
 Methamphetamine most often causes a general feeling of wellness (euphoria) that is usually called a "rush." Other symptoms are increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, and large, wide pupils.  If you take a large amount of the drug, you will likely have some more dangerous side effects, including: Agitation Chest pain Coma or unresponsiveness (in extreme cases) Heart attack Irregular or stopped heartbeat  Difficulty breathing Very high body temperature Kidney damage and possibly kidney failure Paranoia Seizures Severe stomach pain Stroke Long-term use of methamphetamine can lead to significant psychological problems, including: Delusional behavior Extreme paranoia Major mood swings Insomnia (severe inability to sleep) Other symptoms may include: Missing and rotted teeth (called "meth mouth") Repeated infections Severe weight loss Skin sores (abscesses or boils) The length of time methamphetamines stay active can be much longer than for cocaine and other stimulants. Some paranoid delusions can last for 15 hours. Home Care 
 
 If you believe someone has taken methamphetamine and they are having bad symptoms, get them medical help right away. Take extreme caution around them, especially if they appear to be extremely excited or paranoid.  If they are having a seizure, gently hold the back of their head to prevent injury. If possible, turn their head to the side in case they vomit. DO NOT try to stop their arms and legs from shaking. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Before you call for emergency help, this have this information ready, if possible: Person's approximate age and weight  How much of the drug was taken?  How was the drug taken? (For example, was it smoked or snorted?)  How long has it been since the person took the drug?  If the patient is actively having a seizure, becoming violent, or having difficulty breathing, do not delay. Call your local emergency number (such as 911). Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal and laxative, if the drug was taken by mouth Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, a tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Chest x-ray CT (computerized tomography) scan (a type of advanced imaging) of the head, if head injury is suspected EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) medicines to treat symptoms such as pain, anxiety, agitation, nausea, seizures, and high blood pressure Poison and drug (toxicology) screening Other medicines or treatments for heart, brain, muscle and kidney complications  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of drug they took and how quickly they were treated. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Psychosis and paranoia may last up to 1 year, even with aggressive medical treatment. Memory loss and difficulty sleeping may be permanent. Skin changes and tooth loss are permanent unless the person has cosmetic surgery to correct the problems. Further disability may occur if the person had a heart attack or a stroke. These can happen if the drug caused very high blood pressure and body temperatures.  The long-term outlook depends on what organs are affected. Permanent damage may occur, which may cause:  Seizures, stroke, and paralysis Chronic anxiety and psychosis (severe mental disorders) Decreased mental functioning Heart problems Kidney failure that requires dialysis (kidney machine) Destruction of muscles, which can lead to amputation  An extremely large methamphetamine overdose can cause death.  Alternative Names 
 
 Intoxication - amphetamines; Intoxication - uppers; Amphetamine intoxication; Uppers overdose; Overdose - methamphetamine; Crank overdose; Meth overdose; Crystal meth overdose; Speed overdose; Ice overdose; MDMA overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al, eds.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Leffert LR. Substance abuse. In: Chestnut DH, Wong CA, Tsen CL, et al, eds.  Chestnut's Obstetric Anesthesia: Principles and Practice . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 54. Lynch MJ, Pizon AF. Sympathomimetics. In: Wolfson AB, Hendey GW, Ling LJ, et al, eds.  Harwood-Nuss' Clinical Practice of Emergency Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:chap 333. Mycyk MB. Hallucinogens and drugs of abuse. In: Adams JG.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 150. Rao RB, Hoffman RS. Cocaine and Other Sympathomimetics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 154. 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Methamphetamine 
 Browse the Encyclopedia