
 Methanol poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Methanol is a nondrinking type of alcohol used for industrial and automotive purposes. This article discusses poisoning from an overdose of methanol. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Methyl alcohol Where Found 
 
 Methanol is found in: Antifreeze Canned heating sources Copy machine fluids De-icing fluid Fuel additives (octane boosters) Paint remover or thinner Shellac Varnish Windshield wiper fluid  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Airway and lungs Breathing difficulty No breathing  Eyes Blindness, complete or partial, sometimes described as "snow blindness" Blurred vision Dilation (widening) of the pupils  Heart and blood Low blood pressure  Nervous system Agitated behavior Coma Confusion Difficulty walking Dizziness Headache Seizures  Skin and nails Bluish-colored lips and fingernails  Stomach and intestines Abdominal pain (severe) Diarrhea Liver problems, including jaundice (yellow skin) and bleeding Nausea Pancreatitis (nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain) Vomiting, sometimes bloody Other Fatigue Leg cramps Weakness  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT (computerized tomography, or advanced imaging) scan EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Medicines to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effect of the poison (fomepizole or ethanol) Tube through the nose to remove remaining poison, if the person is seen within 60 minutes after swallowing it  Because rapid removal of methanol is a key to treatment success and survival, the person will likely need dialysis (kidney machine).  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Methanol is extremely poisonous. As little as 2 tablespoons (30 milliliters) can be deadly to a child. About 2 to 8 ounces (60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. Blindness is common and often permanent despite medical care. How well the person does depends on how much poison is swallowed and how soon treatment is received. Alternative Names 
 
 Wood alcohol poisoning References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 1/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia