
 MIBG scintiscan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An MIBG scintiscan is a type of imaging test. It uses a radioactive substance (called a tracer). A scanner finds or confirms the presence of  pheochromocytoma  and  neuroblastoma . These are types of tumors that affect nerve tissue. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A radioisotope (MIBG, iodine-131-meta-iodobenzylguanidine, or iodine-123-meta-iodobenzylguanidine) is injected into a vein. This compound attaches to specific tumor cells. You will have the scan later that day or the next day. For this part of the test, you lie on a table under the arm of the scanner. Your abdomen is scanned. You may need to return for repeated scans for 1 to 3 days. Each scan takes 1 to 2 hours. Before or during the test, you may be given an iodine mixture. This prevents your thyroid gland from absorbing too much of the radioisotope. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will need to sign an informed consent form. You will be asked to wear a hospital gown or loose-fitting clothes. You will need to remove jewelry or metal objects before each scan. Many drugs interfere with the test. Ask your health care provider which of your regular medicines you may need to stop taking before the test.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel a sharp needle prick when the material is injected. The table may be cold or hard. You must lie still during the scan. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to help diagnose pheochromocytoma. It is done when an  abdominal CT scan  does not give a definite answer. It is also used to help diagnose neuroblastoma and can be used for carcinoid tumors. Normal Results 
 
 There are no signs of a tumor. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The test may be done to: Locate pheochromocytoma (most common usage) Detect multiple tumors Detect tumors that are located outside the adrenal tissues Detect  multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II Risks 
 
 There is some exposure to radiation from the radioisotope. The radiation from this radioisotope is higher than from many others. You may need to take extra precautions for a few days after the test. Your provider will tell you what actions to take. Before or during the test, you may be given an iodine solution. This will keep your thyroid gland from absorbing too much iodine. Usually people take potassium iodide for 1 day prior and 6 days after. This blocks the thyroid from taking up the MIBG. This test should NOT be done on pregnant women. The radiation can pose danger to the unborn baby. Alternative Names 
 
 Adrenal medullary imaging; Meta-iodobenzylguanidine scintiscan; Pheochromocytoma - MIBG; Neuroblastoma - MIBG; Carcinoid MIBG Images 
 
 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 MIBG injection 
 References 
 
 Bleeker G, Tytgat GAM, Adam JA, et al. 123I-MIBG scintigraphy and 18F-FDG-PET imaging for diagnosing neuroblastoma.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;(9):CDC009263. PMID: 26417712  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26417712 . Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. C. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, ed.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:750-809. Hutton BF, Segerman D, Miles KA. Radionuclide and hybrid imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 6. Young WF. Adrenal medulla, catecholamines, and pheochromocytoma. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 228. Read More 
 
 CT scan 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 PET scan 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.      
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neuroblastoma 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia