
 Milk-alkali syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Milk-alkali syndrome is a condition in which there is a high level of calcium in the body ( hypercalcemia ). This causes a shift in the body's acid/base balance toward alkaline (metabolic alkalosis). As a result, there can be a  loss of kidney function . Causes 
 
 Milk-alkali syndrome is almost always caused by taking too many calcium supplements, usually in the form of calcium carbonate. Calcium carbonate is a common calcium supplement. It is often taken to prevent or treat bone loss ( osteoporosis ). Calcium carbonate is also an ingredient found in antacids (such as Tums).  A high level of vitamin D in the body, such as from taking supplements, can worsen milk-alkali syndrome. Calcium deposits in the kidneys and in other tissues can occur in milk-alkali syndrome. Symptoms 
 
 In the beginning, the condition usually has no symptoms (asymptomatic). When symptoms do occur, they can include: Back, middle of the body, and low back pain in the kidney area (related to kidney stones) Confusion, strange behavior Constipation Depression Excessive urination Fatigue Irregular heartbeat ( arrhythmia ) Nausea or vomiting Other problems that can result from kidney failure  Exams and Tests 
 
 Calcium deposits within the tissue of the kidney ( nephrocalcinosis ) may be seen on: X-rays CT scan Ultrasound Other tests used to make a diagnosis may include: Electrolyte  levels Electrocardiogram ( ECG ) Kidney function Blood gas Blood calcium  level  Treatment 
 
 In severe cases, treatment involves giving fluids through the vein (by IV). Otherwise, treatment involves drinking fluids along with reducing or stopping calcium supplements and antacids that contain calcium. Vitamin D supplements also need to be reduced or stopped. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition is often reversible if kidney function remains normal. Severe prolonged cases may lead to permanent kidney failure requiring  dialysis . Possible Complications 
 
 The most common complications include: Calcium deposits in tissues (calcinosis) Kidney failure Kidney stones When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: You take a lot of calcium supplements or you often use antacids that contain calcium, such as Tums. You may need to be checked for milk-alkali syndrome. You have any symptoms that might suggest kidney problems.  Prevention 
 
 If you use calcium-containing antacids often, tell your provider about digestive problems. If you are trying to prevent osteoporosis, do not take more than 1.5 grams of calcium per day unless instructed by your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Calcium-alkali syndrome; Cope syndrome; Burnett syndrome; Hypercalcemia; Calcium metabolism disorder References 
 
 Ferri FF. Milk-alkali syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia: PA Elsevier; 2016:803.e2-e3. Smogorzewski MJ, Stubbs JR, Yu ASL. Disorders of calcium, magnesium, and phosphate balance. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Peptic ulcer 
 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Walead Latif DO, nephrologist, Medical Director of Fresenius Vascular Care, and Clinical Assistant Professor of Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
 Browse the Encyclopedia