
 Mineral spirits poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mineral spirits are liquid chemicals used to thin paint and as a degreaser. Mineral spirits poisoning occurs when someone swallows or breathes in (inhales) the fumes from mineral spirits. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredients in mineral spirits are hydrocarbons, which are substances that contain only hydrogen and carbon. Examples are benzene and methane. Where Found 
 
 These substances may be found in: Mineral spirits ( Stoddard solvent ) Some paints Some floor and furniture waxes and polishes Some dry cleaning fluids White spirits  Note:  This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Mineral spirit poisoning can cause symptoms in many parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Breathing difficulty (from inhalation) Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue Vision loss  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Abdominal pain -- severe Blood stools Burns of the esophagus (food pipe) Vomiting, possibly bloody  HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure -- develops rapidly Rapid heartbeat  NERVOUS SYSTEM Burning sensations Convulsions Dizziness Loss of alertness Memory problems Nervousness Numbness in arms and legs  SKIN Burns Irritation Necrosis (holes) in the skin or underlying tissues  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through a vein (IV) Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement) Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. The ultimate outcome depends on the extent of this damage. Damage can continue to occur for several weeks after the poison was swallowed. Death may occur as long as a month after the poison was swallowed. References 
 
 Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 158. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia