
 Mitral valve prolapse 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mitral valve prolapse is a heart problem involving the mitral valve, which separates the upper and lower chambers of the left side of the heart. In this condition, the valve does not close normally. Causes 
 
 The mitral valve helps blood on the left side of the heart flow in one direction. It closes to keep blood from moving backwards when the heart beats (contracts). Mitral valve prolapse is the term used when the valve does not close properly. It can be caused by many different things.  In most cases, it is harmless. The problem generally does not affect health and most people with the condition are not aware of it. In a small number of cases, the prolapse can cause blood to leak backwards. This is called mitral regurgitation. Mitral valve prolapse often affects thin women who may have minor chest wall deformities, scoliosis, or other disorders. Some forms of mitral valve prolapse seem to be passed down through families (inherited). Mitral valve prolapse is also seen with some connective tissue disorders such as  Marfan syndrome  and other rare genetic disorders. Symptoms 
 
 Many people with mitral valve prolapse DO NOT have symptoms. The group of symptoms found in people with mitral valve prolapse is called "mitral valve prolapse syndrome," and includes: Chest pain (not caused by coronary artery disease or a heart attack) Dizziness Fatigue Panic attacks Sensation of feeling the heart beat ( palpitations ) Shortness of breath with activity or when lying flat (orthopnea)  When mitral regurgitation occurs, symptoms may be related to this leaking.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and use a stethoscope to listen to your heart and lungs. The provider may feel a thrill (vibration) over the heart, and hear a  heart murmur  (midsystolic click). The murmur gets longer and louder when you stand up. Blood pressure is most often normal. Echocardiogram is the most common test used to diagnose mitral valve prolapse. The following tests may also be used to diagnose mitral valve prolapse or a  leaky mitral valve  or complications from those conditions: Cardiac catheterization Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest ECG (may show arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation) MRI of the heart  Treatment 
 
 Most of the time, there are few or no symptoms and treatment is not needed. In the past, most people with heart valve problems were given antibiotics before dental work or procedures such as colonoscopy to prevent an infection in the heart. However, antibiotics are now used much less often. Check with your health care provider to see if you need antibiotics. There are many heart medicines that may be used to control this condition. You may need surgery to repair or replace your mitral valve if it becomes very leaky (regurgitation), and if the leakiness also causes symptoms. However, this may not occur. You may need  mitral valve repair  or replacement if: Your symptoms get worse. The left ventricle of your heart is enlarged. Your heart function gets worse.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, mitral valve prolapse is harmless and does not cause symptoms. Symptoms that do occur can be treated and controlled with medicine or surgery.  Some abnormal heartbeats (arrhythmias) in people with mitral valve prolapse can be life threatening. If the valve leakage becomes severe, your outlook may be similar to that of people who have mitral regurgitation from any other cause. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Chest discomfort, palpitations, or fainting spells that get worse Long-term illnesses with fevers  Alternative Names 
 
 Barlow syndrome; Floppy mitral valve; Myxomatous mitral valve; Billowing mitral valve; Systolic click-murmur syndrome; Prolapsing mitral leaflet syndrome; Chest pain - mitral valve prolapse Images 
 
 
 Mitral valve prolapse 
 Heart valve surgery - series 
 References 
 
 Carabello BA. Valvular heart disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 75. Nishimura. RA, Otto CM, Bownow RO, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148(1):e1-e132. PMID: 24939033  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24939033 . Otto CM, Bonow RO. Valvular heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 63. Read More 
 
 Atrial septal defect (ASD) 
 Endocarditis 
 Marfan syndrome 
 Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive 
 Mitral valve surgery - open 
 Scoliosis 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Heart valve surgery - discharge  
 Review Date 2/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mitral Valve Prolapse 
 Browse the Encyclopedia