
 Mononeuropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mononeuropathy is damage to a single nerve, which results in  loss of movement , sensation, or other function of that nerve. Causes 
 
 Mononeuropathy is a type of damage to a nerve outside the brain and spinal cord ( peripheral neuropathy ). Mononeuropathy is most often caused by injury. Bodywide ( systemic ) disorders can also cause isolated nerve damage. Long-term pressure on a nerve due to swelling or injury can result in mononeuropathy. The covering of the nerve ( myelin  sheath) or part of the nerve cell (the axon) may be damaged. This damage slows or prevents signals from traveling through the damaged nerves. Mononeuropathy may involve any part of the body. Some common forms of mononeuropathy include: Axillary nerve dysfunction  (loss of movement or sensation in the shoulder)
  Common peroneal nerve dysfunction  (loss of movement or sensation in the foot and leg)
  Carpal tunnel syndrome  (median nerve dysfunction -- including numbness, tingling, weakness, or muscle damage in the hand and fingers)
  
 Cranial mononeuropathy III,  compression  or  diabetic  type
  Cranial mononeuropathy VI  (double vision) Cranial mononeuropathy VII (facial paralysis) Femoral nerve dysfunction  (loss of movement or sensation in part of the leg) Radial nerve dysfunction  (problems with movement in the arm and wrist and with sensation in the back of the arm or hand) Sciatic nerve dysfunction  (problem with the muscles of the back of the knee and lower leg, and sensation to the back of the thigh, part of the lower leg, and sole of the foot) Ulnar nerve dysfunction  (cubital tunnel syndrome -- including numbness, tingling, weakness of outer and underside of arm, palm, ring and little fingers) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the specific nerve affected, and may include: Loss of sensation Paralysis Tingling , burning, pain,  abnormal sensations Weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and focus on the affected area. A detailed medical history is needed to determine the possible cause of the disorder. Tests that may be done include: Electromyogram  (EMG) to check the electrical activity in the muscles Nerve conduction tests  (NCV) to check the speed of electrical activity in the nerves Nerve ultrasound to view the nerves X-ray ,  MRI  or  CT scan  to get an overall view of the affected area Blood tests Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to allow you to use the affected body part as much as possible. Some medical conditions make nerves more prone to injury. For example, high blood pressure and diabetes can injure an artery, which can often affect a single nerve. So, the underlying condition should be treated. Treatment options may include any of the following: Medicines taken by mouth such as painkillers and other drugs for chronic pain Injections of steroid medicines to reduce  swelling  and pressure on the nerve Surgery to relieve pressure on the nerve Physical therapy exercises to maintain muscle strength Braces,  splints , or other devices to help with movement Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Mononeuropathy may be disabling and painful. If the cause of the nerve dysfunction can be found and successfully treated, a full recovery is possible in some cases. Nerve pain  may be uncomfortable and last for a long time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity, loss of tissue mass Medicine side effects Repeated or unnoticed injury to the affected area due to lack of sensation Prevention 
 
 Avoiding pressure or traumatic injury may prevent many forms of mononeuropathy. Treating conditions such as high blood pressure or diabetes also decreases the risk of developing the condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy; Isolated mononeuritis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 420. Wolfe VM, Rosenwasser MP, Tang P. Entrapment neuropathies of the arm, elbow, and forearm. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 67. Read More 
 
 Axillary nerve dysfunction 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 Cranial mononeuropathy III 
 Cranial mononeuropathy III - diabetic type 
 Cranial mononeuropathy VI 
 Femoral nerve dysfunction 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Muscle function loss 
 Myelin 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Radial nerve dysfunction 
 Sciatica 
 Systemic 
 Tibial nerve dysfunction 
 Ulnar nerve dysfunction 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia