
 Morphine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Morphine is a very strong painkiller. Morphine overdose occurs when a person intentionally or accidentally takes too much of the medicine. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Morphine sulfate Where Found 
 
 Astramorph Morphine M S Contin Roxanol Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Bluish-colored fingernails and lips Coma Constipation Difficulty breathing , shallow breathing, slow and  labored breathing ,  no breathing Drowsiness Pinpoint pupils Nausea Possible seizures Spasms of the stomach or intestinal tract Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional.


Perform  mouth-to-mouth breathing  if the person stops breathing. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 If possible, determine the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The health care team will closely monitor the person's breathing. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Laxative Naloxone, a medicine (antidote) to reverse the effect of the poison, many doses may be needed  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A large overdose can cause a person to stop breathing and die if medical attention or an antidote is not given right away. The person may need to be admitted to the hospital to continue treatment. References 
 
 Bardsley CH. Opioids. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 162. Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. 
 Review Date 1/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Opioid Abuse and Addiction 
 Browse the Encyclopedia