
 Mouth ulcers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mouth  ulcers  are sores or open lesions in the mouth. Causes 
 
 Mouth ulcers are caused by many disorders. These include: Canker sores Gingivostomatitis Herpes simplex ( fever blister ) Leukoplakia Oral cancer Oral lichen planus Oral  thrush A skin sore caused by histoplasmosis may also appear as a mouth ulcer. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms will vary, based on the cause of the mouth ulcer. Symptoms may include: Open sores in the mouth Pain or discomfort in the mouth Exams and Tests 
 
 Most of the time, a health care provider or dentist will look the ulcer and where it is in the mouth to make the diagnosis. You may need blood tests or a biopsy of the ulcer may be needed to confirm the cause. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms. The underlying cause of the ulcer should be treated if it is known.  Gently cleaning your mouth and teeth may help relieve your symptoms. Medicines that you rub directly on the ulcer such as antihistamines, antacids, and corticosteroids may help soothe discomfort. Avoid hot or spicy foods until the ulcer is healed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies depending on the cause of the ulcer. Many mouth ulcers are harmless and heal without treatment. Some types of  cancer  may first appear as a mouth ulcer that does not heal. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cellulitis  of the mouth, from secondary bacterial infection of ulcers Dental infections ( tooth abscesses ) Oral cancer Spread of contagious disorders to other people  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: A mouth ulcer does not go away after 3 weeks. You have mouth ulcers return often, or if new symptoms develop.  Prevention 
 
 To help prevent mouth ulcers and complications from them: Brush your teeth at least twice a day and floss once a day. Get regular dental cleanings and checkups.  Alternative Names 
 
 Oral ulcer; Stomatitis - ulcerative; Ulcer - mouth Images 
 
 
 Oral thrush 
 Canker sore (aphthous ulcer) 
 Lichen planus on the oral mucosa 
 Mouth sores 
 References 
 
 Daniels TE. Diseases of the mouth and salivary glands. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 433. Mirowski GW, Mark LA. Oral disease and oral-cutaneous manifestations of gastrointestinal and liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 22. Read More 
 
 Canker sore 
 Cellulitis 
 Gingivostomatitis 
 Leukoplakia 
 Lichen planus 
 Mouth sores 
 Oral cancer 
 Tooth abscess 
 Ulcers 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia