
 Movement - uncontrolled or slow 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uncontrolled or slow movement is a problem with muscle tone, usually in the large muscle groups. The problem leads to slow, uncontrollable jerky movements of the head, limbs, trunk, or neck. Considerations 
 
 The abnormal movement may be reduced or disappear during sleep. Emotional stress makes it worse. Abnormal and sometimes strange postures may occur because of these movements. Causes 
 
 The slow twisting movements of muscles (athetosis) or jerky muscle contractions (dystonia) may be caused by one of many conditions, including: Cerebral palsy Drug side effects Encephalitis Genetic diseases Hepatic encephalopathy Huntington disease Stroke  Sometimes two conditions (such as a brain injury and medication) interact to cause the abnormal movements when neither one alone would cause a problem. Home Care 
 
 Get enough sleep and avoid too much stress. Take safety measures to avoid injury. Follow the treatment plan your doctor prescribes. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have unexplained movements that you cannot control The problem is getting worse Uncontrolled movements  occur with other symptoms What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. This may include a detailed examination of the nervous and muscle systems. The doctor will ask about your medical history and symptoms, including: When did you develop this problem? Is it always the same? Is it always present or only sometimes? Is it getting worse? Is it worse after exercise? Is it worse during times of emotional stress? Have you been injured or in an accident recently? Have you been sick recently? Is it better after you sleep? Does anyone else in your family have a similar problem? What other symptoms do you have? What medicines are you taking?  Tests that may be ordered include: Blood studies (such as  metabolic panel , complete blood count ( CBC ),  blood differential ) CT scan of the head  or affected area EEG EMG  and  nerve conduction velocity  studies (sometimes done) Genetic studies Lumbar puncture MRI of the head  or affected area Urinalysis Treatment is based on the movement problem the person has and on the condition that may be causing the problem. If medicines are used, the health care provider will decide which medicine to prescribe based on the person's symptoms and any test results. Alternative Names 
 
 Dystonia; Involuntary slow and twisting movements; Choreoathetosis; Leg and arm movements - uncontrollable; Arm and leg movements - uncontrollable; Slow involuntary movements of large muscle groups; Athetoid movements Images 
 
 
 Muscular atrophy 
 References 
 
 Jankovic J, Lang AE. Movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Lang AE. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 410. Read More 
 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Encephalitis 
 Huntington disease 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia