
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Multiple mononeuropathy is a nervous system disorder that involves damage to at least 2 separate nerve areas. Causes 
 
 Multiple mononeuropathy is a form of damage to 1 or more peripheral nerves. These are the nerves outside the brain and spinal cord. It is a group of symptoms (syndrome), not a disease. However, certain diseases can cause the injury or nerve damage that leads to the symptoms of multiple mononeuropathy. Common conditions include: Blood vessel diseases such as  polyarteritis nodosa Connective tissue diseases such as  rheumatoid arthritis  or  systemic lupus erythematosus  (the most common cause in children) Diabetes Less common causes include: Amyloidosis , an abnormal buildup of proteins in tissues and organs Blood disorders (such as hypereosinophilia and cryoglobulinemia) Infections such as  Lyme disease , HIV/AIDS, or hepatitis Leprosy Sarcoidosis , inflammation of the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, eyes, skin, or other tissues Sjögren syndrome , a disorder in which the glands that produce tears and saliva are destroyed Wegener granulomatosis , an inflammation of the blood vessel Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the specific nerves involved, and may include: Loss of bladder or bowel control Loss of sensation in one or more areas of the body Paralysis  in one or more areas of the body Tingling, burning, pain, or other abnormal sensations in one or more areas of the body Weakness in one or more areas of the body  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms, focusing on the nervous system. To diagnose this syndrome, there usually needs to be problems with 2 or more unrelated nerve areas. Common nerves affected are the: Axillary nerve  in either arm and shoulder Common peroneal nerve  in the lower leg Distal median nerve  to the hand Femoral nerve  in the thigh Radial nerve  in the arm Sciatic nerve  in the back of the leg Ulnar nerve  in the arm  Tests may include: Electromyogram  (EMG, a recording of electrical activity in the muscles) Nerve biopsy  to examine a piece of the nerve under a microscope Nerve conduction tests  to measure how fast nerve impulses move along the nerve Imaging tests, such as x-rays  Blood tests that may be done include: Antinuclear antibody panel  (ANA) Blood chemistry tests C-reactive protein Imaging scans Pregnancy test Rheumatoid factor Sedimentation rate Thyroid tests X-rays  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to: Treat the illness that is causing the problem, if possible Provide supportive care to maintain independence Control symptoms  To improve independence, treatments may include: Occupational therapy Orthopedic help (for example, a wheelchair, braces, and splints) Physical therapy (for example, exercises and retraining to increase muscle strength) Vocational therapy  Safety is an important for people with sensation or movement problems. Lack of muscle control and decreased sensation may increase the risk of falls or injuries. Safety measures include: Having adequate lighting (such as leaving lights on at night) Installing railings Removing obstacles (such as loose rugs that may slip on the floor) Testing water temperature before bathing Wearing protective shoes (no open toes or high heels)  Check shoes often for grit or rough spots that may injure the feet. People with decreased sensation should check their feet (or other affected area) often for bruises, open skin areas, or other injuries that may go unnoticed. These injuries may become severely infected because the pain nerves of the area are not signaling the injury. People with multiple mononeuropathy are prone to new nerve injuries at pressure points such as the knees and elbows. They should avoid putting pressure on these areas, for example, by not leaning on the elbows, crossing the knees, or holding similar positions for long periods. Medicines that may help include: Over-the-counter or prescription pain drugs Antiseizure or antidepressant drugs to reduce stabbing pains  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A full recovery is possible if the cause is found and treated, and if the nerve damage is limited. Some people have no disability. Others have a partial or complete loss of movement, function, or sensation. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity, loss of tissue or muscle mass Disturbances of organ functions Medicine side effects Repeated or unnoticed injury to the affected area due to lack of sensation Relationship problems due to  impotence When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice signs of multiple mononeuropathy. Prevention 
 
 Preventive measures depend on the specific disorder. For example, with diabetes, eating healthy foods and keeping a tight control of blood sugar may help prevent multiple mononeuropathy from developing. Alternative Names 
 
 Mononeuritis multiplex; Mononeuropathy multiplex; Multifocal neuropathy; Peripheral neuropathy - mononeuritis multiplex Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 420. Read More 
 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Leprosy 
 Muscle atrophy 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Polyarteritis nodosa 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia