
 Mumps 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mumps is a contagious disease that leads to painful swelling of the  salivary glands . The salivary glands produce saliva, a liquid that moistens food and helps you chew and swallow. Causes 
 
 Mumps is caused by a virus. The virus spreads from person to person by drops of moisture from the nose and mouth, such as through sneezing. It is also spread through direct contact with items that have infected saliva on them. Mumps most often occurs in children ages 2 through 12 who have not been vaccinated against the disease. However, the infection can occur at any age and may also be seen in college age students. The time between being exposed to the virus and getting sick (incubation period) is about 12 to 25 days. Mumps may also infect the: Central nervous system Pancreas Testes Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of mumps may include: Face pain Fever Headache Sore throat Loss of appetite Swelling  of the parotid glands (the largest salivary glands, located between the ear and the jaw) Swelling of the temples or jaw (temporomandibular area) Other symptoms that can occur in males are: Testicle lump Testicle pain Scrotal swelling Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform an exam and ask about the symptoms, especially when they started. No tests are needed in most cases. The provider can usually diagnose mumps by looking at the symptoms. Blood tests may be needed to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for mumps. The following things can be done to relieve symptoms: Apply ice or heat packs to the neck area. Take acetaminophen (Tylenol) to relieve pain. DO NOT give aspirin to children with a viral illness because of the risk for  Reye syndrome . Drink extra fluid. Eat soft foods. Gargle with warm salt water.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this disease do well most of the time, even if organs are involved. After the illness is over, they'll be  immune  to mumps for the rest of their life.  Possible Complications 
 
 Infection of other organs may occur, including testicle swelling ( orchitis ). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child has mumps along with: Red eyes Constant  drowsiness Constant vomiting or  abdominal pain Severe  headache Pain or a lump in testicle Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or visit the emergency room if  convulsions  occur. Prevention 
 
 MMR immunization (vaccine)  protects against  measles , mumps, and  rubella . It should be given to children at these ages: First dose: 12 through 15 months old Second dose: 4 through 6 years old Adults can also receive the vaccine. Talk to your provider about this. Recent outbreaks of the mumps have supported the importance of having all children vaccinated. Alternative Names 
 
 Epidemic parotitis; Viral parotitis; Parotitis Images 
 
 
 Head and neck glands 
 References 
 
 Gnann JW. Mumps. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 369. Litman N, Baum SG. Mumps virus. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 159. Mason WH. Mumps. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 248. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Central nervous system 
 Testes 
 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mumps 
 Browse the Encyclopedia