
 Muscle function loss 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Muscle function loss is when a muscle does not work or move normally. The medical term for complete loss of muscle function is paralysis. Considerations 
 
 Loss of muscle function may be caused by: A disease of the muscle itself (myopathy) A disease of the area where the muscle and nerve meet (neuromuscular junction) A disease of the nervous system: Nerve damage (neuropathy), spinal cord injury (myelopathy), or brain damage ( stroke  or other brain injury)  The loss of muscle function after these types of events can be severe. Often it will not completely return, even with treatment. Paralysis can be temporary or permanent. It can affect a small area (localized) or be widespread (generalized). It may affect one side (unilateral) or both sides (bilateral). If the paralysis affects the lower half of the body and both legs it is called paraplegia. If it affects both arms and legs, it is called quadriplegia. If the paralysis affects the muscles that cause breathing, it is quickly life-threatening. Causes 
 
 Diseases of the muscles that cause muscle-function loss include: Alcohol-associated myopathy Congenital myopathies (most often due to a genetic disorder) Dermatomyositis  and  polymyositis Drug-induced myopathy (statins, steroids) Muscular dystrophy Diseases of the nervous system that cause muscle function loss include: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  (ALS, or Lou Gehrig disease) Bell palsy Botulism Guillain-Barré syndrome Myasthenia gravis  or Lambert-Eaton Syndrome Neuropathy Paralytic  shellfish  poisoning Periodic paralysis Focal nerve injury Polio Spinal cord injury Stroke  Home Care 
 
 Sudden loss of muscle function is a medical emergency. Get medical help right away. After you have received medical treatment, your health care provider may recommend some of the following measures: Follow your prescribed therapy. If the nerves to your face or head are damaged, you may have difficulty chewing and swallowing or closing your eyes. In these cases, a soft diet may be recommended. You will also need some form of eye protection, such as a patch over the eye while you are asleep. Long-term immobility can cause serious complications. Change positions often and take care of your skin. Range-of-motion exercises may help to maintain some muscle tone. Splints  may help prevent muscle contractures, a condition in which a muscle becomes permanently shortened.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Muscle paralysis always requires immediate medical attention. If you notice gradual weakening or problems with a muscle, get medical attention as soon as possible. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The doctor will perform a  physical exam  and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including: Location:  What part(s) of your body are affected? Does it affect one or both sides of your body? Did it develop in a top-to-bottom pattern (descending paralysis), or a bottom-to-top pattern (ascending paralysis)? Do you have difficulty getting out of a chair or climbing stairs? Do you have difficulty lifting your arm above your head? Do you have problems extending or lifting your wrist (wrist drop)? Do you have difficulty gripping (grasping)?  Symptoms:  Do you have pain? Do you have  numbness ,  tingling , or  loss of sensation ? Do you have difficulty controlling your bladder or bowels? Do you have shortness of breath? What other symptoms do you have?  Time pattern:  Do episodes occur repeatedly (recurrent)? How long do they last? Is the muscle function loss getting worse (progressive)? Is it progressing slowly or quickly? Does it become worse over the course of the day?  Aggravating and relieving factors:  What, if anything, makes the paralysis worse? Does it get worse after you take potassium supplements or other medicines? Is it better after you rest?  
Tests that may be performed include: Blood studies (such as  CBC ,  white blood cell differential , blood chemistry levels, or muscle enzyme levels) CT scan of the head  or spine MRI of the head  or spine Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) Muscle or nerve  biopsy 
   Myelography
    Nerve conduction studies and  electromyography Intravenous  feeding or feeding tubes may be required in severe cases. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, or speech therapy may be recommended. Alternative Names 
 
 Paralysis; Paresis; Loss of movement; Motor dysfunction References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Mammen AL, Amato A. Statin myopathy: a review of recent progress.  Curr Opin Rheum . 2010;22(6):644-650. PMID: 20827205  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20827205 . Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 421. Warner WC, Sawyer JR. Neuromuscular disorders. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 35. Read More 
 
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
 Botulism 
 Broken bone 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Muscle cramps 
 Poisoning - fish and shellfish 
 Polio 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, attending neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Neuromuscular Disorders 
 Paralysis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia