
 Muscle biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A muscle biopsy is the removal of a small piece of muscle tissue for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure is usually done while you are awake. The health care provider will apply a numbing medicine (local anesthesia) to the biopsy area.  There are 2 types of muscle biopsy: A needle biopsy involves inserting a needle into the muscle. When the needle is removed, a small piece of tissue remains in the needle. More than one needle stick may be needed to get a large enough sample. An open biopsy involves making a small cut in the skin and into the muscle. The muscle tissue is then removed. After either type of biopsy, the tissue is sent to a laboratory for examination.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is usually needed. If you will have anesthesia, follow instructions on not eating or drinking anything before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 During the biopsy, there is usually little or no discomfort. You may feel some pressure or tugging. The anesthetic may burn or sting when injected (before the area becomes numb). After the anesthetic wears off, the area may be sore for about a week. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A muscle biopsy may be done to identify or detect: Inflammatory diseases of muscle (such as  polymyositis  or  dermatomyositis ) Diseases of the connective tissue and blood vessels (such as polyarteritis nodosa) Infections that affect the muscles (such as  trichinosis  or  toxoplasmosis ) Inherited muscle disorders such as  muscular dystrophy  or congenital myopathy Metabolic defects of the muscle Effects of medicines, toxins, or  electrolyte  disorders  A muscle biopsy may also be done to tell the difference between nerve and muscle disorders. A muscle that has recently been injured, such as by an  EMG  needle, or is affected by a pre-existing condition, such as nerve compression, is not a good choice for a biopsy. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means the muscle is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A muscle biopsy can help diagnose the following conditions: Loss of muscle mass ( atrophy) Muscle disease that involves inflammation and a skin rash ( dermatomyositis ) Inherited muscle disorder ( Duchenne muscular dystrophy ) Inflammation of the muscle Various muscular dystrophies Destruction of the muscle ( myopathic changes ) Tissue death of the muscle  (necrosis) Disorders that involve inflammation of the blood vessels and affect muscles ( necrotizing vasculitis ) Traumatic muscle damage Paralyzed muscles Inflammatory disease causing muscle weakness, swelling tenderness, and tissue damage ( polymyositis ) Nerve problems that affect the muscles Muscle tissue under the skin (fascia) becomes swollen, inflamed, and thick ( eosinophilic fasciitis )  There are additional conditions under which the test may be performed. Risks 
 
 The risks of this test are small, but may include: Bleeding Bruising Damage to the muscle tissue or other tissues in the area (very rare) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - muscle Images 
 
 
 Muscle biopsy 
 References 
 
 Dubowitz V, Sewry CA, Oldfors A. The procedure of muscle biopsy. In: Dubowitz V, Sewry CA, Oldfors A, eds.  Muscle Biopsy: A Practical Approach . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 1. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 Cardiac amyloidosis 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 Dermatomyositis 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 Eosinophilic fasciitis 
 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis 
 Muscle atrophy 
 Muscle disorder 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Necrosis 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Polyarteritis nodosa 
 Polymyalgia rheumatica 
 Polymyositis - adult 
 Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis 
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Trichinosis 
 
 Review Date 7/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia