
 Mycoplasma pneumonia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumonia is inflamed or swollen lung tissue due to infection with a germ. Mycoplasma pneumonia is caused by the bacteria  Mycoplasma pneumoniae  ( M pneumoniae ) . This type of pneumonia is also called  atypical pneumonia  because the symptoms are different from those of pneumonia due to other common bacteria. Causes 
 
 Mycoplasma pneumonia usually affects people younger than 40.  People who live or work in crowded areas such as schools and homeless shelters have a high chance of getting this condition. But many people who get sick with it have no known risk factors.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are often mild and appear over 1 to 3 weeks. They may become more severe in some people. Common symptoms include any of the following: Chest pain Chills Cough , usually dry and not bloody Excessive sweating Fever  (may be high) Headache Sore throat  Less common symptoms include: Ear pain Eye pain  or soreness Muscle aches  and  joint stiffness Neck lump Rapid breathing Skin lesions  or rash  Exams and Tests 
 
 People with suspected pneumonia should have a complete medical evaluation. It may be hard for your health care provider to tell whether you have pneumonia, bronchitis, or another respiratory infection, so you may need a chest x-ray.  Depending on how severe your symptoms are, other tests may be done, including: Complete blood count  (CBC) Blood tests Bronchoscopy  (rarely needed) CT scan of the chest Measuring levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood ( arterial blood gases ) Nose or throat swab to check for bacteria Open lung biopsy  (only done in very serious illnesses when the diagnosis cannot be made from other sources) Sputum tests  to check for mycoplasma bacteria  Treatment 
 
 To feel better, you can take these self-care measures at home: Control your fever with aspirin, NSAIDs (such as ibuprofen or naproxen), or acetaminophen. DO NOT give aspirin to children because it may cause a dangerous illness called  Reye syndrome . DO NOT take cough medicines without first talking to your provider. Cough medicines may make it harder for your body to cough up the extra sputum. Drink plenty of fluids to help loosen secretions and bring up phlegm. Get a lot of rest. Have someone else do household chores. Antibiotics are used to treat atypical pneumonia: You may be able to take antibiotics by mouth at home. If your condition is severe, you will likely be admitted to a hospital. There, you will be given antibiotics through a vein (intravenously), as well as oxygen. Antibiotics might be used for 2 weeks or more. Finish all the antibiotics you've been prescribed, even if you feel better. If you stop the medicine too soon, the pneumonia can return and may be harder to treat. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people recover completely without antibiotics, although antibiotics may speed recovery. In untreated adults, cough and weakness can last for up to a month. The disease can be more serious in older adults and in those with a weakened immune system. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include any of the following: Ear infections Hemolytic anemia , a condition in which there are not enough red blood cells in the blood because the body is destroying them Skin rashes When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you develop a fever, cough, or shortness of breath. There are many causes for these symptoms. The provider will need to rule out pneumonia. Also, call if you have been diagnosed with this type of pneumonia and your symptoms become worse after improving first. Prevention 
 
 Wash your hands often, and have other people around you do the same. If your immune system is weak, stay away from crowds. Ask visitors who have a cold to wear a mask. DO NOT smoke. If you do, get help to quit. Get a  flu shot  every year. Ask your provider if you need a  pneumonia vaccine . Alternative Names 
 
 Walking pneumonia; Community-acquired pneumonia - mycoplasma; Community-acquired pneumonia - atypical Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Erythema multiforme, circular lesions - hands 
 Erythema multiforme, target lesions on the palm 
 Erythema multiforme on the leg 
 Exfoliation following erythroderma 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Baum SG. Mycoplasma infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 317. Holzman RS, Simberkoff MS. Mycoplasma pneumoniae and atypical pneumonia. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 185. Read More 
 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Otitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia