
 Myelofibrosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myelofibrosis is a disorder of the bone marrow in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue. Causes 
 
 Bone marrow is the soft, fatty tissue inside your bones. Stem cells are immature cells in the bone marrow that develop into all of your blood cells. Your blood is made of: Red blood cells (which carry oxygen to your tissues) White blood cells (which fight infection) Platelets (which help your blood clot)  When the bone marrow is scarred, it cannot make enough blood cells.  Anemia , bleeding problems, and a higher risk for infections may occur. As a result, the liver and spleen try to make some of these blood cells. This causes these organs to swell. The cause of myelofibrosis is unknown. There are no known risk factors. When it occurs, it often develops slowly in people over age 50. Blood and bone marrow cancers such as myelodysplastic syndrome,  leukemia , and lymphoma may also cause bone marrow scarring. This is called secondary myelofibrosis. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Abdominal fullness , pain, or feeling full before finishing a meal (because of an enlarged spleen) Bone pain 
   Easy bleeding,  bruising Fatigue Increased likelihood of getting an infection Pale skin Shortness of breath  with exercise  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count  (CBC) with blood smear to check different types of blood cells Measuring tissue damage ( LDH enzyme level ) Genetic testing  Bone marrow biopsy  to diagnose the condition and to check for bone marrow cancers  Treatment 
 
 Bone marrow  or stem cell transplant may improve symptoms, and may cure the disease. This treatment is usually considered for younger people. Other treatment may involve: Blood transfusions and medicines to correct anemia Radiation and  chemotherapy Medicines to target a genetic mutation linked to this disease, if present 
  Removal of the spleen ( splenectomy ) if swelling causes symptoms, or to help with anemia  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 As the disease worsens, the bone marrow slowly stops working. Low platelet count leads to easy bleeding. Spleen swelling may get worse along with anemia. Survival of people with primary myelofibrosis is about 5 years. But some people survive for decades. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Development of  acute myelogenous leukemia Infections Bleeding Blood clots Liver failure  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Seek medical care right away for uncontrolled bleeding, shortness of breath, or jaundice (yellow skin and whites of the eyes) that gets worse. Alternative Names 
 
 Idiopathic myelofibrosis; Myeloid metaplasia; Agnogenic myeloid metaplasia; Primary myelofibrosis; Secondary myelofibrosis; Bone marrow - myelofibrosis References 
 
 Mascarenhas J, Najfeld V, Kremyanskaya M, Hoffman R. Primary myelofibrosis. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 69. Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 166. Read More 
 
 Acute myeloid leukemia - adult 
 Anemia 
 Platelet count 
 Splenomegaly 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Marrow Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia