
 Ménière disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ménière disease is an inner ear disorder that affects balance and hearing. Causes 
 
 Your inner ear contains fluid-filled tubes called labyrinths. These tubes, along with a nerve in your skull, help you know the position of your body and help maintain your balance. The exact cause of Ménière disease is unknown. It may occur when the pressure of the fluid in part of the inner ear gets too high. In some cases, Ménière disease may be related to: Head injury Middle or inner  ear infection Other risk factors include: Alcohol use Allergies Family history Recent cold or viral illness Smoking Stress Use of certain medicines Ménière disease is a fairly common disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Attacks of Ménière disease often start without warning. They may occur daily or as rarely as once a year. The severity of each attack can vary. Ménière disease usually has four main symptoms: Hearing loss  that changes Pressure in the ear Ringing or roaring in the affected ear, called  tinnitus Vertigo, or dizziness  Severe vertigo is the symptom that causes the most problems. With vertigo, you feel as though you are spinning or moving, or that the world is spinning around you. Nausea, vomiting, and sweating often occur. Symptoms get worse with sudden movement. Often, you will need to lie down. You may feel dizzy and off-balance for anywhere from 20 minutes to 24 hours.  Hearing loss is often only in one ear, but it may affect both ears. Hearing tends to improve between attacks, but gets worse over time. Low frequency hearing is lost first. You also may have roaring or ringing in the ear (tinnitus), along with a sense of pressure in your ear  Other symptoms include: Diarrhea Headaches Pain or discomfort in the abdomen Nausea and vomiting Uncontrollable eye movements Exams and Tests 
 
 A brain and nervous system exam may show problems with hearing, balance, or eye movement. A hearing test will show the hearing loss that occurs with Ménière disease. Hearing may be near normal after an attack. A  caloric stimulation  test checks your eye reflexes by warming and cooling the inner ear with water. Test results that are not in the normal range can be a sign of Ménière disease. These tests may also be done to check for other causes of vertigo: Electrocochleography (ECOG) Electronystagmography  (ENG) or videonystagmography (VNG) Head MRI scan Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for Ménière disease. However, lifestyle changes and some treatments can help relieve symptoms. Your health care provider may suggest ways to reduce the amount of fluid in your body. This can often help control symptoms. Water pills (diuretics) may help relieve fluid pressure in the inner ear A  low-salt diet  may also help  To help ease symptoms and stay safe: Avoid sudden movements, which may worsen symptoms. You may need help walking during attacks. Avoid bright lights, TV, and reading during attacks. They can make symptoms worse. Do not drive, operate heavy machinery, or climb until 1 week after your symptoms disappear. A sudden dizzy spell during these activities can be dangerous. Remain still and rest when you have symptoms. Gradually increase your activity after attacks.  Symptoms of Ménière disease can cause stress. Make healthy lifestyle choices to help you cope: Eat a well-balanced, healthy diet. Don't overeat. Exercise regularly, if possible. Get enough sleep. Limit caffeine and alcohol.  Help ease stress by using relaxation techniques, such as: Guided imagery Meditation Progressive muscle relaxation Tai chi Yoga  Your provider may prescribe: Antinausea medicines to relieve nausea and vomiting Diazepam (Valium) or motion sickness medicines, such as meclizine (Antivert, Bonine, Dramamine) to relieve dizziness and vertigo  You may need ear surgery if your symptoms are severe and do not respond to other treatments. Surgery to cut the vestibular nerve helps control vertigo. It does not damage hearing. Injecting steroids or an antibiotic called gentamicin directly into the middle ear can help control vertigo. Removing part of the inner ear (labyrinthectomy) helps treat vertigo. This causes complete hearing loss.  Hearing aids may be needed for severe hearing loss. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Ménière disease can often be controlled with treatment. Or, the condition may get better on its own. In some cases, Ménière disease can be (long-term) chronic or disabling. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of Ménière disease, or if symptoms get worse. These include hearing loss, ringing in the ears, or dizziness. Prevention 
 
 You can't prevent Ménière disease. Treating early symptoms right away may help prevent the condition from getting worse. Treating an  ear infection  and other related disorders may be helpful. Alternative Names 
 
 Hydrops; Hearing loss; Endolymphatic hydrops; Dizziness - Ménière disease; Vertigo - Ménière disease; Hearing loss - Ménière disease; Dizziness - Ménière disease 
 Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Tympanic membrane 
 References 
 
 Chang AK, Olshaker JS. Dizziness and vertigo. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 19. Crane BT, Minor LB. Peripheral vestibular disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 165. Ruckenstein MJ, ed.  Ménière's Disease; Evidence and Outcomes . San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing; 2010. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Allergies - overview 
 Dizziness 
 Ear infection - acute 
 Fatigue 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Hearing loss 
 Respiratory 
 Stress and your health 
 Tinnitus 
 
 Review Date 8/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meniere's Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia