
 Naproxen sodium overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Naproxen sodium is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) used to relieve mild to moderate aches and pains. Naproxen sodium overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medication. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Naproxen Where Found 
 
 Naproxen sodium is sold under a variety of brand names, including: Aleve Anaprox Anaprox DS Naprelan Naprosyn  Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of naproxen sodium overdose include: Agitation Blurred vision Coma Confusion Convulsions  (seizures) Diarrhea Dizziness Drowsiness Headache - severe Heartburn Incoherence (the person is not understandable) Movement problems Nausea Rash Ringing in the ears Slow,  labored breathing Stomach pain (possible bleeding in the stomach and intestines) Unsteadiness Vomiting Wheezing  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If a doctor prescribed the medicine for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Fluids through a vein (IV) Laxatives Medicines to treat symptoms  In rare, serious cases, more treatments may be needed. Most people will be discharged from the emergency department after being observed for a period of time. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is likely. References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Seger DL, Murray L. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 149. 
 Review Date 1/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia