
 Narcolepsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Narcolepsy is a nervous system problem that causes extreme sleepiness and attacks of daytime sleep. Causes 
 
 Experts aren't sure of the exact cause of narcolepsy. It may have more than one cause.  Many people with narcolepsy have a low level of hypocretin (also known as orexin). This is a chemical made in the brain that helps you stay awake. In some people with narcolepsy, there are fewer of the cells that make this chemical. This may be due to an  autoimmune  reaction. An autoimmune reaction is when the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.  Narcolepsy can run in families. Researchers have found certain genes linked to narcolepsy. Symptoms 
 
 Narcolepsy symptoms usually first occur between 15 and 30 years old. Below are the most common symptoms.  
 EXTREME DAYTIME SLEEPINESS
  You may feel a strong urge to sleep, often followed by a period of sleep. You can't control when you fall asleep. This is called a sleep attack. These periods can last from a few seconds to a few minutes. They may happen after eating, while talking to someone, or during other situations. Most often, you wake up feeling refreshed. Attacks can occur while you are driving or doing other activities where falling asleep can be dangerous.  
 CATAPLEXY 
  During these attacks, you can't control your muscles and can't move. Strong emotions, such as laughter or anger, can trigger cataplexy. Attacks often last from 30 seconds to 2 minutes. You remain aware during the attack. During the attack, your head falls forward, your jaw drops, and your knees may buckle. In severe cases, you may fall and stay paralyzed for as long as several minutes.  
 HALLUCNATIONS
  You see or hear things that aren't there, either as you fall asleep or when you wake up. During  hallucinations , you may feel afraid or under attack.  
 SLEEP PARALYSIS
  This is when you can't move your body as you start falling asleep or when you first wake up. It may last up to 15 minutes. Most people with narcolepsy have daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. Not everyone has all these symptoms. Surprisingly, despite being very tired, many people with narcolepsy don't sleep well at night. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam. You may have a blood test to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms. These include: Insomnia and other  sleep disorders Restless leg syndrome Seizures Sleep apnea Other medical, psychiatric, or nervous system diseases You may have other tests, including: ECG  (measures the electrical activity of your heart) EEG  (measures the electrical activity of your brain) Sleep study  (polysomnogram) Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT). This is a test to see how long it takes you to fall asleep during a daytime nap. People with narcolepsy fall asleep much faster than people without the condition. Genetic testing to look for the narcolepsy gene.  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for narcolepsy. However, treatment can help control symptoms. LIFESTYLE CHANGES Certain changes can help improve your sleep at night and ease daytime sleepiness: Go to bed and wake up at the same time every day. Keep your bedroom dark and at a comfortable temperature. Make sure your bed and pillows are comfortable. Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and heavy meals several hours before bedtime. Don't smoke. Do something relaxing, such as take a warm bath or read a book before going to sleep. Get regular exercise every day, which can help you sleep at night. Be sure you plan exercise several hours before bedtime. These tips can help you do better at work and in social situations. Plan naps during the day when you typically feel tired. This helps control daytime sleepiness and reduces the number of unplanned sleep attacks. Tell teachers, work supervisors, and friends about your condition. You may want to print out material from the web about narcolepsy for them to read. Get counseling, if needed, to help you cope with the condition. Having narcolepsy can be stressful. If you have narcolepsy, you may have driving restrictions. Restrictions vary from state to state. MEDICINES Stimulant medicines can help you stay awake during the day. Antidepressant medicines can help reduce episodes of cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hallucinations. Sodium oxybate (Xyrem) works well to control cataplexy. It can also help control daytime sleepiness. These drugs may have side effects. Work with your doctor to find the treatment plan that works for you. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Narcolepsy is a lifelong condition. It may be dangerous if episodes occur while driving, operating machinery, or doing similar activities. Narcolepsy can usually be controlled with treatment. Treating other underlying sleep disorders can improve narcolepsy symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Narcolepsy may lead to the following: Trouble functioning at work Trouble being in social situations Injuries and accidents if attacks occur during activities Side effects of medicines used to treat the disorder When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of narcolepsy Narcolepsy does not respond to treatment You develop new symptoms Prevention 
 
 You can't prevent narcolepsy. Treatment may reduce the number of attacks. Avoid situations that trigger the condition if you are prone to attacks of narcolepsy. Alternative Names 
 
 Daytime sleep disorder; Cataplexy Images 
 
 
 Sleep patterns in the young and aged 
 References 
 
 Chokroverty S, Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 68. Vaughn BV. Disorders of sleep. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 405. Read More 
 
 Drowsiness 
 
 Review Date 8/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutger's New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia