
 Narcissistic personality disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Narcissistic personality disorder is a mental condition in which a person has:  An excessive sense of self-importance An extreme preoccupation with themselves A lack of empathy for others Causes 
 
 Cause of this disorder is unknown. Early life experiences, such as insensitive parenting, are thought to play a role in developing this disorder. Symptoms 
 
 A person with this disorder may: React to criticism with rage, shame, or humiliation Take advantage of other people to achieve his or her own goals Have excessive feelings of self-importance Exaggerate achievements and talents Be preoccupied with fantasies of success, power, beauty, intelligence, or ideal love Have unreasonable expectations of favorable treatment Need constant attention and admiration Disregard the feelings of others, and have little ability to feel empathy Have obsessive self-interest Pursue mainly selfish goals Exams and Tests 
 
 Narcissistic personality disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. Treatment 
 
 Talk therapy may help the person relate to other people in a more positive and compassionate way. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome of treatment depends on the severity of the disorder and how willing the person is to change. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Alcohol or other drug use Relationship, work, and family problems  Alternative Names 
 
 Personality disorder - borderline; Narcissism References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Narcissistic personality disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013;669-672. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Hopwood CJ. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. 
 Review Date 7/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia