
 Nasal polyps 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nasal polyps are soft, sac-like growths on the lining of the nose or sinuses. Causes 
 
 Nasal polyps can grow anywhere on the lining of the nose or the sinuses. They often grow where the sinuses open into the nasal cavity. Small polyps may not cause any problems. Large polyps can block your sinuses or nasal airway. Nasal polyps are not cancer. They seem to grow due to long-term swelling and irritation in the nose from allergies, asthma, or infection. No one knows exactly why some people get nasal polyps. If you have any of the following conditions, you may be more likely to get nasal polyps: Aspirin sensitivity Asthma Chronic sinus infections Cystic fibrosis Hay fever Symptoms 
 
 If you have small polyps, you may not have any symptoms. If polyps block nasal passages, a  sinus infection  can develop. Symptoms include: Runny nose Stuffed up nose Sneezing Feeling like your  nose is blocked Loss of smell Loss of taste Headache and pain if you also have a sinus infection  With polyps, you may feel like you always have a head cold. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look in your nose. Polyps look like a grayish grape-shaped growth in the nasal cavity.  You may have a  CT scan  of your sinuses. Polyps will appear as cloudy spots. Older polyps may have broken down some of the bone inside your sinuses. Treatment 
 
 Medicines help relieve symptoms, but rarely get rid of nasal polyps. Nasal steroid sprays shrink polyps. They help clear blocked nasal passages and runny nose. Symptoms return if treatment is stopped. Corticosteroid pills or liquid may also shrink polyps, and can reduce swelling and nasal congestion. The effect lasts a few months in most cases. Allergy medicines can help prevent polyps from growing back. Antibiotics can treat a sinus infection caused by bacteria. They can't treat polyps or sinus infections caused by a virus. If medicines don't work, or you have very large polyps, you may need surgery to remove them. Endoscopic sinus surgery is often used to treat polyps. With this procedure, your doctor uses a thin, lighted tube with instruments at the end. The tube is inserted into your nasal passages and the doctor removes the polyps. Usually you can go home the same day. Sometimes, polyps come back, even after surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Removing polyps with surgery often makes it easier to breathe through your nose. Over time, however, nasal polyps often return. Loss of smell or taste does not always improve following treatment with medicine or surgery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding Infection Polyps coming back after treatment  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you often find it hard to breathe through your nose. Prevention 
 
 You can't prevent nasal polyps. However, nasal sprays, antihistamines, and allergy shots may help prevent polyps that block your airway. Treating sinus infections right away also may help. Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Nasal polyps 
 References 
 
 Bachert C, Calus L, Gevaert P. Rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43.  Becker SS. Surgical management of polyps in the treatment of nasal airway obstruction.  Otolaryngol Clin North Am . 2009;42 (2): 377-385. PMID: 19328899  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19328899 . Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): adult sinusitis executive summary.  Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2015;152(4):598-609. PMID: 25833927  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25833927 . Soler ZM, Smith TL. Results of medical and surgical treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with and without nasal polyps. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Allergic rhinitis 
 Asthma 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Mucosa 
 Stuffy or runny nose - adult 
 Stuffy or runny nose - children 
 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia