
 Nasal mucosal biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A nasal mucosal biopsy is the removal of a small piece of tissue from the lining of the nose so that it can be checked for disease. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A painkiller is sprayed into the nose. In some cases, a numbing shot may be used. A small piece of the tissue that appears abnormal is removed and checked for problems in the laboratory. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. You may be asked to fast for a few hours before the biopsy. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel pressure or tugging when the tissue is removed. After the numbness wears off, the area may be sore for a few days. A small to moderate amount of bleeding after the procedure is common. If there is bleeding, the blood vessels may be sealed with an electric current, laser, or chemical. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Nasal mucosal biopsy is usually done when abnormal tissue is seen during examination of the nose. It may also be done when the health care provider suspects you have a problem affecting the mucosal tissue of the nose. Normal Results 
 
 The tissue in the nose is normal. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Cancer Infections, such as tuberculosis Necrotizing granuloma , a type of tumor Nasal polyps Nasal tumors Sarcoidosis Wegener's disease ( Wegener's granulomatosis ) Risks 
 
 Bleeding from the biopsy site Infection Considerations 
 
 Avoid blowing your nose after the biopsy. Do not pick your nose or put your fingers over the area. Gently squeeze the nostrils shut if there is bleeding, holding pressure for 10 minutes. If the bleeding doesn't stop after 30 minutes, you may need to come in to see your doctor. The blood vessels may be sealed with an electric current or packing. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - nasal mucosa; Nose biopsy Images 
 
 
 Sinuses 
 Throat anatomy 
 Nasal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Jackson RS, McCaffrey TV. Nasal manifestations of systemic disease. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 12. Posner MR. Head and neck cancer. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 196. Read More 
 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Juvenile angiofibroma 
 Nasal polyps 
 Necrotizing granuloma 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Airway, Voice, and Swallowing Disorders, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia