
 Neck lump 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A neck lump is any lump, bump, or swelling in the neck. Considerations 
 
 There are many causes of lumps in the neck. The most common lumps or swellings are  enlarged lymph nodes . These can be caused by bacterial or viral infections, cancer ( malignancy ), or other rare causes. Swollen salivary glands under the jaw may be caused by infection or cancer. Lumps in the muscles of the neck are caused by injury or  torticollis . These lumps are often at the front of the neck. Lumps in the skin or just below the skin are often caused by  cysts , such as  sebaceous cysts . The thyroid gland may also produce swelling or one or more lumps. This can be due to thyroid disease or cancer. Most cancers of the thyroid gland grow very slowly. They are often cured with surgery, even if they have been present for several years. All neck lumps in children and adults should be checked right away by a health care provider. In children, most neck lumps are caused by infections that can be treated. Treatment should start quickly to prevent complications or the spread of infection. As adults age, the likelihood of the lump being a cancer increases. This is particularly true for people who smoke or drink a lot of alcohol. Most lumps in adults are not cancers. Causes 
 
 Lumps in the neck from swollen lymph nodes may be caused by: Bacterial or viral infection Cancer Thyroid disease Allergic reaction Lumps in the neck due to enlarged salivary glands may be caused by: Infection Mumps Salivary gland tumor Stone in salivary duct Home Care 
 
 See your provider to have the cause of the neck lump treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if you have an abnormal neck swelling or lumps in your neck. What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The health care provider will take your medical history and do a physical exam. You may be asked questions such as:  Where is the lump located? Is it a hard lump or a soft, pliable (moves slightly), bag-like (cystic) mass? Is it painless? Is the entire neck swollen? Has it been growing bigger? Over how many months? Do you have a  rash  or other symptoms Do you have  difficulty breathing ?  If you are diagnosed with a thyroid goiter, you may need to take medicine or have surgery to remove it.  You may need the following tests if the provider suspects a thyroid  nodule :  CT scan of the head  or neck Radioactive  thyroid scan Thyroid  biopsy If the lump is caused by a bacterial infection, you may need to take antibiotics. If the cause is a noncancerous mass or cyst, you may need surgery to remove it. Alternative Names 
 
 Lump in the neck Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Neck lump 
 References 
 
 Nugent A, El-Deiry M. Differential diagnosis of neck masses. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 114. Pfaff JA, Moore GP. Otolaryngology. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Cyst 
 Malignancy 
 Sebaceous cyst 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 Torticollis 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Neck Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia