
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Necrotizing vasculitis is a group of disorders that involve inflammation of the blood vessel walls. The size of the affected blood vessels helps to determine the names of these conditions and how the disorder causes disease. Causes 
 
 Necrotizing vasculitis is common with: Polyarteritis nodosa Rheumatoid arthritis Scleroderma Systemic lupus erythematosus Granulomatosis with polyangiitis  (formerly called Wegener granulomatosis)  It is very rare in children. The cause of the inflammation is unknown. It is likely related to  autoimmune  factors. The wall of the blood vessel may scar and thicken, or die (become  necrotic ). The blood vessel may close, interrupting blood flow to the tissues it supplies. The lack of blood flow will cause the tissues to die. Necrotizing vasculitis may affect any blood vessel in the body. Therefore, it can cause problems in the skin or any other organ. Symptoms 
 
 Fever, chills, fatigue, arthritis, or weight loss may be the only symptoms at first. However, symptoms may be in almost any part of the body.  
 Skin: Red or purple colored bumps on the legs, hands or other parts of the body Bluish color to the fingers and toes Signs of tissue death due to lack of oxygen such as pain, redness, and ulcers that do not heal   
 Muscles and joints: Joint pain Leg pain Muscle weakness   
 Brain and nervous system: Pain,  numbness , tingling in an arm, leg, or other body area Weakness of an arm, leg, or other body area Pupils that are different sizes Eyelid drooping Swallowing difficulty Speech impairment Movement difficulty   
 Lungs and respiratory tract: Cough Shortness of breath Sinus congestion and pain Coughing up blood or bleeding from the nose   
 Other symptoms include: 
  Abdominal pain Blood in the urine  or  stools Painful menstruation Hoarseness or changing voice Chest pain from damage of the arteries that supply the heart (coronary arteries)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a complete physical exam. A nervous system (neurological) exam may show signs of nerve damage. Tests that may be done include: Biopsy  of the skin, muscle, organ tissue, or  nerve Chest x-ray C-reactive protein test Sedimentation rate Urinalysis Hepatitis  blood test Blood test for antibodies against neutrophils (ANCA antibodies) or nuclear antigens (ANA) Blood test for cryoglobulins Imaging studies such as angiogram, ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  Treatment 
 
 Corticosteroids are given in most cases. The dose will depend on how bad the condition is.  Other drugs that suppress the immune system may reduce inflammation of the blood vessels. For severe disease, rituximab, (Rituxan) may be used. Another choice for severe disease is cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan). Related conditions include: Henoch-Schönlein purpura Leukocytoclastic vasculitis Kawasaki disease Polyarteritis nodosa Granulomatosis with polyangiitis Microscopic polyangiitis Churg-Strauss vasculitis Takayasu vasculitis Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the location of the vasculitis and the severity of tissue damage. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Permanent damage to the structure or function of the affected area Secondary infections  of necrotic tissues  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of necrotizing vasculitis. Emergency symptoms include: Changes in pupil size Loss of function of an arm, leg, or other body part Speech problems Swallowing difficulty Weakness  Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Arteritis; Angiitis Images 
 
 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012 revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature of Vasculitides.  Arthritis Rheum . 2013;65(1):1-11. PMID: 23045170  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23045170 . Stone JH. Classification and epidemiology of systemic vasculitis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 87. Read More 
 
 Necrosis 
 Polyarteritis nodosa 
 Proliferation 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Scleroderma 
 Secondary infections 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lupus 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Scleroderma 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia