
 Neonatal sepsis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neonatal sepsis is a blood infection that occurs in an infant younger than 90 days old. Early-onset sepsis is seen in the first week of life occurs after 1 week and before 3 months of age.  Causes 
 
 Neonatal sepsis can be caused by bacteria such as  Escherichia coli  ( E.coli ),  Listeria , and some strains of streptococcus. Group B streptococcus (GBS) has been a major cause of neonatal sepsis. However, this problem has become less common because women are screened during pregnancy. The  herpes simplex virus  (HSV) can also cause a severe infection in a newborn baby. This happens most often when the mother is newly infected.  Early-onset neonatal sepsis most often appears within 24 hours of birth. The baby gets the infection from the mother before or during delivery. The following increase an infant's risk of early-onset bacterial sepsis: GBS colonization during pregnancy Preterm delivery  Water breaking (rupture of membranes) longer than 18 hours before birth  Infection of the placenta tissues and amniotic fluid (chorioamnionitis)  Babies with late-onset neonatal sepsis are infected after delivery. The following increase an infant's risk of sepsis after delivery: Having a catheter in a blood vessel for a long time Staying in the hospital for an extended period of time  Symptoms 
 
 Infants with neonatal sepsis may have the following symptoms: Body temperature changes Breathing problems Diarrhea or decreased bowel movements Low blood sugar Reduced movements Reduced sucking Seizures Slow or fast heart rate Swollen belly area Vomiting Yellow skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Lab tests can help diagnose neonatal sepsis and identify the cause of the infection. Blood tests may include: Blood culture C-reactive protein Complete blood count (CBC)  If a baby has symptoms of sepsis, a lumbar puncture (spinal tap) will be done to look at the spinal fluid for bacteria. Skin, stool, and urine cultures may be done for herpes virus, especially if the mother has a history of infection. A chest x-ray will be done if the baby has a cough or problems breathing. Urine culture tests are done in babies older than a few days.  Treatment 
 
 Babies younger than 4 weeks old who have fever or other signs of infection are started on intravenous (IV) antibiotics right away. (It may take 24 to 72 hours to get lab results.) Newborns whose mothers had chorioamnionitis or who may be at high risk for other reasons will also get IV antibiotics at first, even if they have no symptoms. The baby will get antibiotics for up to 3 weeks if bacteria are found in the blood or spinal fluid. Treatment will be shorter if no bacteria are found.  An antiviral medicine called acyclovir will be used for infections that may be caused by HSV. Older babies who have normal lab results and have only a fever may not be given antibiotics. Instead, the child may be able to leave the hospital and come back for checkups. Babies who need treatment and have already gone home after birth will most often be admitted to the hospital for monitoring. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many babies with bacterial infections will recover completely and have no other problems. However, neonatal sepsis is a leading cause of infant death. The more quickly an infant gets treatment, the better the outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Disability  Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical help right away for an infant that shows symptoms of neonatal sepsis. Prevention 
 
 Pregnant women may need preventive antibiotics if they have: Chorioamnionitis Group B strep colonization Given birth in the past to a baby with sepsis caused by bacteria  Other things that can help prevent sepsis include: Preventing and treating infections in mothers, including HSV Providing a clean place for birth Delivering the baby within 12 to 24 hours of when the membranes break (Cesarean delivery should be done in women within 4 to 6 hours or sooner of membranes breaking.)  Alternative Names 
 
 Sepsis neonatorum; Neonatal septicemia; Sepsis - infant References 
 
 American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases and Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Policy Statement: Recommendations for the Prevention of Perinatal Group B Streptococcal (GBS) Disease.  Pediatrics . 2011:128(3):611-6. PMID: 21807694  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21807694 .  Baley JE, Gonzalez BE. Perinatal viral infections. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015;chapter 57. Leonard EG, Dobbs K. Postnatal bacterial infections. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015;chapter 55. Verani JR, McGee L, Schrag S. Prevention of Perinatal Group B Streptococcal Disease, Revised Guidelines from CDC, 2010.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 59(RR-10):1-36. PMID: 21088663  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21088663 .  
 Review Date 4/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sepsis 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia