
 Nerve biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A nerve biopsy is the removal of a small piece of a nerve for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A nerve biopsy is most often done on a nerve in the ankle, forearm, or along a rib. The health care provider applies medicine to numb the area before the procedure. The doctor makes a small surgical cut and removes a piece of the nerve. The cut is then closed and a bandage put on it. The nerve sample is sent to a lab, where it is examined under a microscope. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the numbing medicine (local anesthetic) is injected, you will feel a prick and a mild sting. The biopsy site may be sore for a few days after the test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Nerve biopsy may be done to help diagnose: Axon degeneration (destruction of the axon portion of the nerve cell) Damage to the small nerves Demyelination  (destruction of parts of the  myelin  sheath covering the nerve) Inflammatory nerve conditions (neuropathies) Conditions for which the test may be done include any of the following: Alcoholic neuropathy Axillary nerve dysfunction Brachial plexopathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (hereditary) Common peroneal nerve dysfunction Distal median nerve dysfunction Mononeuritis multiplex Mononeuropathy Necrotizing vasculitis Neurosarcoidosis Radial nerve dysfunction Tibial nerve dysfunction Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means the nerve appears normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Amyloidosis  (sural nerve biopsy is most often used) Demyelination Inflammation of the nerve Leprosy Loss of axon tissue Metabolic neuropathies Necrotizing vasculitis Sarcoidosis Risks  
 
 Allergic reaction  to the local anesthetic Discomfort after the procedure Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Permanent nerve damage (uncommon; minimized by careful site selection) Nerve biopsy is invasive and is useful only in certain situations. Talk to your provider about your options. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - nerve Images 
 
 
 Nerve biopsy 
 References 
 
 Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 420.  Weis J, Brandner S, Lammens M, Sommer C, Vallat JM. Processing of nerve biopsies: a practical guide for neuropathologists.  Clin Neuropathol . 2012;31:7-23. PMID: 22192700  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22192700 . Read More 
 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Axillary nerve dysfunction 
 Brachial plexopathy 
 Central pontine myelinolysis 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 Distal median nerve dysfunction 
 Leprosy 
 Metabolic neuropathies 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Myelin 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Neurosarcoidosis 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Radial nerve dysfunction 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Tibial nerve dysfunction 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN), Gainesville, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia