
 Nerve conduction velocity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) is a test to see how fast electrical signals move through a nerve. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Patches called surface electrodes are placed on the skin over nerves at different spots. Each patch gives off a very mild electrical impulse. This stimulates the nerve. The nerve's resulting electrical activity is recorded by the other electrodes. The distance between electrodes and the time it takes for electrical impulses to travel between electrodes are used to measure the speed of the nerve signals. Electromyography (recording from needles placed into the muscles) is often done at the same time as this test. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must stay at a normal body temperature. Being too cold slows nerve conduction. Tell your doctor if you have a cardiac defibrillator or pacemaker. Special steps will need to be taken before the test if you have one of these devices. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The impulse may feel like an electric shock. You may feel some discomfort depending on how strong the impulse is. You should feel no pain once the test is finished.  Often, the nerve conduction test is followed by electromyography (EMG). In this test, needles are placed into a muscle and you are told to contract that muscle. This process can be uncomfortable during the test. You may have muscle soreness after the test at the site of the needles. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to diagnose nerve damage or destruction. The test may sometimes be used to evaluate diseases of nerve or muscle, including:  Myopathy Lambert-Eaton syndrome Myasthenia gravis Normal Results 
 
 NCV is related to the diameter of the nerve and the degree of myelination (the presence of a myelin sheath on the axon) of the nerve. Newborn infants have values that are approximately half that of adults. Adult values are normally reached by age 3 or 4. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Most often, abnormal results are due to nerve damage or destruction, including: Axonopathy (damage to the long portion of the nerve cell) Conduction block (the impulse is blocked somewhere along the nerve pathway) Demyelination (damage and loss of the fatty insulation surrounding the nerve cell)  The nerve damage or destruction may be due to many different conditions, including: Alcoholic neuropathy Diabetic neuropathy Nerve effects of uremia (from kidney failure) Traumatic injury to a nerve Guillain-Barré syndrome Diphtheria Carpal tunnel syndrome Brachial plexopathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (hereditary) Chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy Common peroneal nerve dysfunction Distal median nerve dysfunction Femoral nerve dysfunction Friedreich ataxia General paresis Mononeuritis multiplex Primary amyloidosis Radial nerve dysfunction Sciatic nerve dysfunction Secondary systemic amyloidosis Sensorimotor polyneuropathy Tibial nerve dysfunction Ulnar nerve dysfunction  Any peripheral neuropathy can cause abnormal results. Damage to the spinal cord and disk herniation (herniated nucleus pulposus) with nerve root compression can also cause abnormal results. Considerations 
 
 An NCV test shows the condition of the best surviving nerve fibers. Therefore, in some cases the results may be normal even if there is nerve damage. Alternative Names 
 
 NCV Images 
 
 
 Nerve conduction test 
 References 
 
 Griggs RC, Jozefowicz RF, Aminoff MJ. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 396. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Brachial plexopathy 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Central pontine myelinolysis 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Diphtheria 
 Distal median nerve dysfunction 
 Femoral nerve dysfunction 
 General paresis 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Herniated disk 
 Lambert-Eaton syndrome 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Radial nerve dysfunction 
 Sciatica 
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis 
 Sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
 Tibial nerve dysfunction 
 Ulnar nerve dysfunction 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and immediate past president of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neurologic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia