
 Nocardia infection 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nocardia infection is a disorder that affecs the lungs, brain, or skin. It occurs mainly in people with weakened immune systems. Causes 
 
 Nocardia infection is an infection caused by a bacterium. It usually starts in the lungs. It may spread to other organs, most often the brain and the skin. It may also involve the kidneys, joints, heart, eyes, and bones. Nocardia bacteria are found in soil around the world. You can get the disease by breathing in dust that has the bacteria. You can also get the diseaseor if soil containing nocardia bacteria gets into an open wound. You are more likely to get this infection if you have chronic lung disease or a weakened immune system, which can occur with transplants, cancer, HIV/AIDs, and long-term use of steroids.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary and depend on the organs involved. If in the lungs, symptoms may include: Chest pain when breathing (may occur suddenly or slowly) Coughing up blood Fevers Night sweats Weight loss  If in the brain, symptoms may include:  Fever  Headache  Seizures  If the skin is affected, symptoms may include: Skin breakdown  Skin breakdown and abnormal passage or draining tract ( fistula ) Ulcers or nodules with infection sometimes spreading along lymph nodes  Some people with nocardia infection have no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. Nocardiosis is diagnosed using tests that identify the bacteria. Depending on the part of the body infected, testing may involve taking a tissue sample by: Brain biopsy Bronchoscopy Lung biopsy Skin biopsy Sputum culture  Treatment 
 
 You will need to take antibiotics for 6 months to a year or longer. You may need more than one antibiotic.  Surgery may be done to drain pus that has collected in the skin or tissues ( abscess ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on your overall health and the parts of the body involved. Infection that affects many areas of the body are hard to treat, and some persons may not be able to recover.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of nocardial infections depend on how much of the body is involved.  Certain lung infections may lead to scarring and chronic shortness of breath. Skin infections may lead to scarring or disfigurement. Brain abscesses may lead to loss of neurological function.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have any symptoms of this infection. They are nonspecific symptoms that can have many other causes.  Alternative Names 
 
 Nocardiosis Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Sorrell TC, Mitchell DH, Iredell JR, Chen SC-A. Nocardia species. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 255. Southwick FS. Nocardiosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 338. 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia