
 Open lung biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An open  lung biopsy  is surgery to remove a small piece of tissue from the lung. The sample is then examined for  cancer , infection, or  lung disease . How the Test is Performed 
 
 An open lung biopsy is done in the hospital using  general anesthesia , which means you are asleep and pain-free. A tube will be placed through your mouth down your throat to help you breathe. The surgery is done in the following way: After cleaning the skin, the surgeon makes a small cut in the left or right side of your chest. The ribs are gently separated. Tissue is taken from the lung and sent to a laboratory for examination. After surgery, the wound is closed with stitches. Your surgeon may leave a small plastic tube in your chest to prevent air and fluid from building up. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should tell the health care provider if you are pregnant,  allergic  to any medicines, or if you have a bleeding problem. Be sure to tell your provider about all the medicines you take, including herbs, supplements, and those bought without a prescription.  Follow your surgeon's instructions for not eating or drinking before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When you wake up after the procedure, you will feel  drowsy  for several hours.  There will be some tenderness and pain where the surgical cut is located. Most surgeons inject a long-acting local anesthetic at the surgical cut site so that you will have very little pain afterwards. You may have a sore throat from the tube. You can ease the pain by eating ice chips. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The open lung biopsy is done to evaluate lung problems seen on  x-ray  or  CT scan . Normal Results 
 
 The lungs and lung tissue will be normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Benign  tumors Cancer Certain infections (bacterial, viral, or fungal) Lung diseases (fibrosis)  The procedure may help diagnose a number of different conditions, such as: Rheumatoid lung disease Sarcoidosis Wegener granulomatosis Risks 
 
 There is a possibility of infection or an air leak into the chest. Your risk depends on whether or not you already have  lung disease . Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - open lung Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Incision for lung biopsy 
 References 
 
 Putnam JB Jr. Lung, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Benign 
 Cancer 
 CT scan 
 Disseminated tuberculosis 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Lung disease 
 Lung needle biopsy 
 Malignant mesothelioma 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Rheumatoid lung disease 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia 
 Solitary fibrous tumor 
 Viral pneumonia 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: John A. Daller, MD, PhD., Department of Surgery, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Biopsy 
 Lung Cancer 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia