
 Optic glioma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gliomas are tumors that grow in various parts of the brain. Optic gliomas can affect: One or both of the optic nerves that carry visual information to the brain from each eye The optic chiasm, the area where the optic nerves cross each other in front of the hypothalamus of the brain An optic glioma may also grow along with a  hypothalamic glioma . Causes 
 
 Optic gliomas are rare. The cause of optic gliomas is unknown. Most optic gliomas are slow-growing and noncancerous ( benign ) and occur in children, almost always before age 20. There is a strong association between optic glioma and neurofibromatosis Type 1 ( NF1 ). Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms are due to the tumor growing and pressing on the optic nerve and nearby structures. Symptoms may include: Involuntary eyeball movement Outward bulging of one or both eyes  Squinting Vision loss in one or both eyes that starts with the loss of  peripheral  vision and eventually leads to  blindness The child may show symptoms of diencephalic syndrome, which includes:  Daytime sleeping Decreased memory and brain function Delayed growth Loss of appetite and body fat  Exams and Tests 
 
 A brain and nervous system (neurologic) examination reveals a loss of vision in one or both eyes. There may be changes in the optic nerve, including swelling or scarring of the nerve, or paleness and damage to the optic disc. The tumor may extend into deeper parts of the brain. There may be signs of increased pressure in the brain (intracranial pressure). There may be signs of  neurofibromatosis type 1  (NF1). The following tests may be performed: Cerebral angiography Examination of tissue removed from the tumor during surgery or  CT  scan-guided  biopsy  to confirm the tumor type Head CT scan  or  MRI of the head Visual field tests during surgery or CT-guided biopsy Treatment 
 
 Treatment varies with the size of the tumor and the general health of the person. The goal may be to cure the disorder, relieve symptoms, or improve vision and comfort. Surgery to remove the tumor may cure some optic gliomas. Partial removal to reduce the size of the tumor can be done in many cases. This will keep the tumor from damaging normal brain tissue around it. Chemotherapy may be used in some children. Chemotherapy may be especially useful when the tumor extends into the hypothalamus or if vision has been worsened by the tumor's growth. Radiation therapy may be recommended in some cases when the tumor is growing despite chemotherapy, and surgery is not possible. In some cases, radiation therapy may be delayed because the tumor is slow growing. Children with NF1 usually won't receive radiation due to the side effects. Corticosteroids may be prescribed to reduce swelling and inflammation during radiation therapy, or if symptoms return. Support Groups 
 
 Organizations that provide support and additional information include: Children's Brain Tumor Foundation  www.cbtf.org Children's Oncology Group  www.childrensoncologygroup.org Neurofibromatosis Network  www.nfnetwork.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is very different for each person. Early treatment improves the chance of a good outcome. Careful follow-up with a care team experienced with this type of tumor is important. Once vision is lost from the growth of an optic tumor, it may not return. Normally, the growth of the tumor is very slow, and the condition remains stable for long periods. However, the tumor can continue to grow, so it must be monitored closely. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider for any vision loss, painless bulging of the eye, or other symptoms of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be advised for people with NF1. Regular eye exams may allow early diagnosis of these tumors before they cause symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Glioma - optic; Optic nerve glioma; Juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma; Brain cancer - optic glioma Images 
 
 
 Neurofibromatosis I, enlarged optic foramen 
 References 
 
 Karcioglu ZA, Haik BG. Eye, orbit, and adnexal structures. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 67. National Cancer Institute: PDQ childhood astrocytomas treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Last modified September 29, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/types/brain/hp/child-astrocytoma-treament-pdq . Accessed January 19, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): Central nervous system cancers. Version 1.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cns.pdf . Accessed January 19, 2015. Sahani M. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 596. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Hypothalamic tumor 
 Neurofibromatosis-1 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 12/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Adam S. Levy, MD, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neurofibromatosis 
 Optic Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia