
 Oropharynx lesion biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An oropharynx lesion biopsy is surgery in which tissue from an abnormal growth or mouth sore is removed and checked for problems. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Painkiller or numbing medicine is first applied to the area. For large sores or sores of the throat,  general anesthesia  may be needed. This means you will be asleep during the procedure. All or part of the problem area (lesion) is removed. It is sent to the laboratory to check for problems. If a growth in the mouth or throat needs to be removed, the biopsy will be done first. This is followed by the actual removal of the growth. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 If a simple painkiller or local numbing medicine is to be used, there is no special preparation. If the test is part of a growth removal or if general anesthesia is used, you will likely be told not to eat for 6 to 8 hours before the test. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 You may feel pressure or tugging while the tissue is being removed. After the numbness wears off, the area may be sore for a few days. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to determine the cause of a sore (lesion) in the throat. Normal Results 
 
 This test is only done when there is an abnormal tissue area. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may mean: Cancer  (such as  squamous cell carcinoma ) Fungal infections (such as candida) Histoplasmosis Oral lichen planus Precancerous sore (leukoplakia) Viral infections (such as Herpes simplex)  Risks 
 
 Risks of the procedure may include: Infection of the site Bleeding at the site  If there is bleeding, the blood vessels may be sealed (cauterized) with an electric current or laser. Considerations 
 
 Avoid hot or spicy food after the biopsy. Alternative Names 
 
 Throat lesion biopsy; Biopsy - mouth or throat; Mouth lesion biopsy Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Oropharyngeal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Harreus U. Malignant neoplasms of the oropharynx. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 100. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Lichen planus 
 Squamous cell skin cancer 
 
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, BS, Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Oral Cancer 
 Throat Cancer 
 Throat Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia