
 Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome is a disorder of the blood vessels that can cause excessive bleeding. Causes 
 
 Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome is inherited, which means it is passed down through families. Scientists have identified 4 genes involved in this condition. All of these genes appear to be important for blood vessels to develop properly. Symptoms 
 
 People with Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome can develop abnormal blood vessels in several areas of the body. These vessels are called arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). If they are on the skin, they are called telangiectasias. The abnormal blood vessels can also develop in the brain, lungs, liver, intestines, or other areas. Symptoms of this syndrome include: Frequent  nosebleeds  in children Bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract (GI) , including loss of blood in the stool, or dark or black stools Port wine stain  (a type of birthmark) Seizures  or unexplained, small  strokes  (from bleeding into the brain) Shortness of breath  Exams and Tests 
 
 An experienced health care provider can detect  telangiectases  during a physical examination. There is often a family history of this condition. Signs include: Abnormal blood vessels that bleed easily in the throat, bowels, or airways AVM seen on  chest x-ray Decreased oxygen levels in the blood Heart failure Enlarged liver Iron deficiency anemia Tests include: Blood gas tests Blood tests Imaging test of the heart called an  echocardiogram Endoscopy , which uses a tiny camera attached to a thin tube to look inside your body  Genetic testing is available to look for changes in genes associated with this syndrome. Treatment 
 
 Treatments may include: Surgery to treat bleeding in some areas Electrocautery  (heating tissue with electricity) or laser surgery to treat frequent or heavy nosebleeds Endovascular embolization  (injecting a substance through a thin tube) to treat abnormal blood vessels in the brain and other parts of the body Some people respond to estrogen therapy, which can reduce bleeding episodes. Iron may also be given if there is a lot of blood loss leading to anemia. Avoid taking blood-thinning medicines. Some drugs that affect blood vessel development are being studied as possible future treatments.  Some people may need to take antibiotics before having dental work or surgery. Ask your provider what precautions you should take. Support Groups 
 
 Cure HHT --  www.curehht.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this syndrome can live a completely normal lifespan, depending on where in the body the AVMs are located. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Heart failure High blood pressure in the lungs ( pulmonary hypertension ) Internal bleeding Shortness of breath  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child has frequent nose bleeds or other signs of this disease. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for couples who want to have children and who have a family history of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. If you have this condition, medical treatments can prevent certain types of strokes and heart failure. Alternative Names 
 
 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; HHT Images 
 
 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF, Ferri H. Osler-Rendu-Weber syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015.  1st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:section I. McDonald J, Wooderchak-Donahue W, VanSant Webb C, Whitehead K, Stevenson DA, Bayrak-Toydemir P. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: genetics and molecular diagnostics in a new era.  Front Genet . 2015;6(1):1-8. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Mucosa 
 Nosebleed  
 Seizures 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Winston-Salem, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arteriovenous Malformations 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia