
 Over-the-counter pain relievers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pain medicines are also called analgesics. Each kind of pain medicine has benefits and risks. Some types of pain respond better to one kind of medicine than to another kind. What takes away your pain might not work for someone else. Taking pain medicines before exercising is OK. But do not overdo the exercise just because you have taken the medicine. Read labels to learn how much medicine you can give your child at one time and during the whole day. This is known as the dosage. Talk to your pharmacist or your child’s health care provider if you are not sure about the correct amount. Do not give children medicine that is meant for adults. Other tips for taking pain medicines: If you take pain relievers on most days, tell your health care provider. You may need to be watched for side effects. Do not take more than the amount recommended on the container or more than your provider tells you to take. Read the warnings on the label before taking the medicine. Store  medicine safely and securely . Check the dates on medicine containers to see when you should throw them away.  Acetaminophen Acetaminophen is known as a non-aspirin pain reliever. It is NOT an NSAID, which is described below. Acetaminophen relieves fever and headaches, and other common aches and pains. It does not relieve inflammation. This medicine does not cause as many stomach problems as other pain medicines do. It is also safer for children. Acetaminophen is often recommended for arthritis pain because it has fewer side effects than other pain medicines. Examples of OTC brands of acetaminophen are Tylenol, Paracetamol, and Panadol. Acetaminophen prescribed by a doctor is usually a stronger medicine. It is often combined with a narcotic ingredient.  Precautions Adults should not take more than 3 grams (3,000 mg) of acetaminophen in a single day. Large amounts can harm your liver. Remember that 3 grams is about the same as six extra-strength pills or nine regular pills. If you are also taking pain medicine prescribed by your health care provider, talk to your provider or pharmacist before taking any OTC acetaminophen. For children, follow package instructions for the maximum amount your child can have in a single day. Call your health care provider if you are not sure about the instructions.  NSAIDs NSAIDs relieve fever and pain. They also reduce swelling from arthritis or a muscle sprain or strain. When taken for a short time (no longer than 10 days), NSAIDs are safe for most people. Some NSAIDs can be bought over the counter, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Other NSAIDs are prescribed by your health care provider.  Precautions DO NOT give aspirin to children .  Reye syndrome  can occur when aspirin is used to treat children who have viral infections, such as chickenpox or the flu.  Talk to your health care provider or pharmacist before using any over-the-counter NSAID if you: Have heart disease, high blood pressure, kidney disease, or stomach or digestive tract bleeding. Take other medicines, especially blood thinners such as  warfarin  or  clopidgrel . Are taking NSAIDs prescribed by your health care provider, including celecoxib (Celebrex) or nabumetone (Relafen).  Alternative Names 
 
 Medications for pain non-narcotic; Drugs for pain non-narcotic; Analgesics; Acetaminophen; NSAID; Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; Pain medicine - over-the-counter; Pain medicine - OTC Images 
 
 
 Pain medications 
 References 
 
 Cohen SP, Raja SR. Pain. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 29. Zhou YL, Principles of pain management. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Lymphangitis  
 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia