
 Oxygen therapy - infants 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Oxygen is a gas that the cells in your body need to work properly. The air we breathe normally contains 21% oxygen. We can receive up to 100% oxygen. WHY IS OXYGEN USED? Babies with heart or lung problems may need to breathe increased amounts of oxygen to get normal levels of oxygen in their blood. HOW IS OXYGEN DELIVERED? There are several ways to deliver oxygen to a baby. Which method is used depends on how much oxygen is needed and whether the baby needs a breathing machine. An oxygen hood is used for babies who can breathe on their own but still need extra oxygen. A hood is a plastic dome or box with warm, moist oxygen inside. The hood is placed over the baby's head. A thin, soft, plastic tube called a nasal cannula may be used instead of a hood. This tube has soft prongs that gently fit into the baby's nose. Oxygen flows through the tube. The baby must be able to breathe without assistance to use this type of oxygen therapy. Another method is a nasal CPAP system. CPAP stands for continuous positive airway pressure. It is used for babies who need more help breathing than they can get from an oxygen hood or nasal cannula, but do not need a machine to completely breathe for them. A CPAP machine delivers oxygen through tubes with soft nasal prongs. The air is under higher pressure, which helps the lungs better expand (inflate). CPAP can be given with a ventilator. Finally, a breathing machine or ventilator may be needed to deliver increased oxygen and breathe for the baby. The oxygen flows through a tube placed down the baby's windpipe. The ventilator will also breathe for the baby if the baby is too weak, tired, or sick to breathe. WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF OXYGEN? Too much or too little oxygen can be harmful. If the cells in the body get too little oxygen, energy production decreases. With too little energy, cells may not work well and may die. Your baby may not grow properly. Many of the developing organs, including the brain and heart, may be injured. Too much oxygen can also cause injury. Breathing too much oxygen can damage the lung. Under certain conditions, too much oxygen in the blood may also lead to problems in the brain and eye. Babies with certain heart conditions may also need lower levels of oxygen in the blood.  Your baby's health care providers will try to balance how much oxygen your baby needs. If you have questions about the risks and benefits of oxygen for your baby, discuss these with your baby's doctor. WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF OXYGEN DELIVERY SYSTEMS? Infants receiving oxygen by hood may get cold if the temperature of the oxygen is not warm enough. Most (but not all) nasal cannulas use cool, dry oxygen. At higher flow rates, this can irritate the inner nose, causing cracked skin, bleeding, or mucus plugs in the nose. This can increase the risk for infection. Similar problems can occur with nasal CPAP devices. Also, some CPAP devices use wide nasal prongs that can change the shape of the nose. Mechanical ventilators  have a number of risks. Talk to your baby's doctor about these risks. Images 
 
 
 Oxygen hood  
 Lungs - infant  
 References 
 
 MacIntyre NR. Principles of mechanical ventilation. In: Mason RJ, Murray JF, Broaddus VC, et al., eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 89. Sarnaik AP, Heidemann SM. Respiratory pathophysiology and regulation. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JF III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 365. 
 Review Date 12/12/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Oxygen Therapy 
 Premature Babies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia