
 Pancreas divisum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pancreas divisum is a birth defect in which parts of the pancreas do not join together. The pancreas is a long, flat organ located between the stomach and spine. It helps in food digestion. Causes 
 
 Pancreas divisum is the most common birth defect of the pancreas. In many cases, this defect goes undetected and causes no problems. The cause of the defect is unknown. As a baby develops in the womb, 2 separate pieces of tissue join together to form the pancreas. Each part has a tube, called a duct. When the parts join together, a final duct, called the pancreatic duct, is formed. Fluid and digestive juices (enzymes) produced by the pancreas normally flow through this duct. If the ducts do not join while the baby is developing in the womb, pancreas divisum results. Fluid from the 2 parts of the pancreas drains into separate areas of the upper portion of the small intestine (duodenum). This occurs in 5% to 15% of people. If a pancreatic duct becomes blocked, swelling and tissue damage (pancreatitis) may develop. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal pain , most often in the mid-abdomen, that may be felt in the back Abdominal swelling  (distention) Nausea or vomiting  Note: Unless you have pancreatitis, you will not have symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have the following tests: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan Amylase  and  lipase  blood test Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)  Treatment 
 
 The following treatments may be needed if you have symptoms of the condition, or if pancreatitis keeps returning: ERCP with a cut to enlarge the opening where the pancreatic duct drains Placement of a stent to prevent the duct from getting blocked  You may need surgery if these treatments do not work.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, the outcome is good. Possible Complications 
 
 The main complication of pancreas divisum is pancreatitis. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Because this condition is present at birth, there is no known way to prevent it. Alternative Names 
 
 Pancreatic divisum Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pancreas 
 References 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia