
 Pancreatic islet cell tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pancreatic islet cell  tumor  is a rare tumor of the pancreas that starts from a type of cell called the islet cell. Causes 
 
 In the healthy pancreas, cells called islet cells produce hormones that regulate a several bodily functions. These include blood sugar level and the production of stomach acid. Tumors that arise from islet cells of the pancreas can also produce a variety of hormones, which can lead to specific symptoms.  Pancreatic islet cell tumors can be noncancerous ( benign ) or cancerous (malignant). Islet cell tumors include: Gastrinoma ( Zollinger-Ellison syndrome ) Glucagonoma Insulinoma A family history of multiple  endocrine  neoplasia, type I ( MEN I ) is a risk factor for the development of islet cell tumors. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on which hormone is made by the tumor. For example, insulinomas produce insulin, which lowers blood sugar level. Symptoms may include: 
 Feeling tired or weak
  
 Shaking or sweating
  
 Headache
  
 Hunger
  
 Nervousness, anxiety, or feeling irritable
  
 Unclear thinking or feeling uneasy
  
 Double or blurry vision
  
 Fast or pounding heartbeat
  If your blood sugar level gets too low, you may faint, have a seizure, or even go into a coma. Gastrinomas make the hormone gastrin, which tells the body to make stomach acid. Symptoms may include: 
 Abdominal pain
  
 Diarrhea
  
 Ulcers in the stomach and small bowel
  
 Vomiting blood (occasionally)
  Glucagonomas make the hormone glucagon, which helps the body raise blood sugar level. Symptoms can include: 
 Diabetes
  Red, blistery rash in the groin or buttocks Weight loss Frequent urination and thirst  Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests may vary, depending upon the symptoms, but may include: Fasting glucose  level Gastrin level Glucose tolerance test Secretin stimulation test  for pancreas Blood glucagon  level Blood insulin C-peptide Blood insulin level  Imaging tests may be done: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Endoscopic  ultrasound MRI of abdomen A blood sample may also be taken from a vein in the pancreas for testing. Sometimes, surgery is needed to diagnose and treat this condition. During this procedure, the surgeon examines the pancreas by hand and with ultrasound. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the type of tumor and if it is cancerous.  Cancerous tumors can grow quickly and spread to other organs. They may not be treatable. Tumors are often removed with surgery, if possible. If cancer cells spread to the liver, a part of the liver may also be removed, if possible. If the cancer is widespread, chemotherapy may be used to try and shrink the tumors. If the abnormal production of hormones is causing symptoms, you may receive medicines to counteract their effects. For example, with gastrinomas, the overproduction of gastrin leads to too much acid in the stomach. Medicines that block stomach acid release can reduce symptoms. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You may be cured if the tumors are surgically removed before they have spread to other organs. If tumors are cancerous, chemotherapy may be used, but it usually cannot cure people. Life-threatening problems (such as very low blood sugar) can occur due to excess hormone production, or if the cancer spreads throughout the body. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of these tumors include: 
   Diabetes
    
   Hormone crises (if the tumor releases certain types of hormones)
    
   Severe low blood sugar (from insulinomas)
    
   Severe ulcers in the stomach and small intestine (from gastrinomas)
    
   Spread of the tumor to the liver
    When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of these tumors, especially if you have a family history of MEN I. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for these tumors. Alternative Names 
 
 Cancer - pancreas; Cancer - pancreatic; Pancreatic cancer; Islet cell tumors; Islet of Langerhans tumor; Neuroendocrine tumors; Peptic ulcer - islet cell tumor; Hypoglycemia - islet cell tumor Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pancreas 
 References 
 
 Mauro LA, Herman JM, Jaffee EM, Laheru DA. Carcinoma of the pancreas. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 81. National Cancer Institute. PDQ pancreatic cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 5, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/pancreatic/HealthProfessional . Accessed April 4, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Version 1.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/pancreatic.pdf . Accessed April 4, 2016. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Endocrine glands 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Tumor 
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia