
 Pancreatitis - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pancreatitis in children occurs when the pancreas becomes swollen and inflamed. Causes 
 
 The pancreas is an organ behind the stomach. It produces chemicals called enzymes, which are needed to digest food. Most of the time, the enzymes are only active after they reach the small intestine. When these enzymes become active inside the pancreas, they digest the tissue of the pancreas. This causes swelling, bleeding  and damage to the organ and its blood vessels. This condition is called pancreatitis. Common causes of pancreatitis in children include: Trauma to the belly, such as from a bicycle handle bar injury Blocked bile duct  Side effects  of medicine, such as anti-seizure medicines, chemotherapy, or some antibiotics Viral infections, including  mumps  and coxsackie B High blood levels of a fat in the blood called  triglycerides Other causes include: After an organ or bone marrow transplant Cystic fibrosis Crohn disease and other disorders when the body's  immune system  attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake Type 1 diabetes Overactive parathyroid gland Kawasaki disease Sometimes, the cause is unknown. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom of pancreatitis in children is severe pain in the upper abdomen. Sometimes the pain may spread to the back, lower abdomen, and front part of the chest. The pain may increase after meals. Other symptoms may include: Cough Nausea and vomiting Swelling in the abdomen Fever Yellowing of the skin, called  jaundice Loss of appetite Increased pulse Exams and Tests 
 
 Your child's health care provider will do a physical exam, which may show: Abdominal tenderness or lump (mass) Fever Low blood pressure Fast heart rate Fast breathing rate The provider will perform lab tests to check the release of pancreatic enzymes. These include tests to check the: Blood amylase level Blood lipase level Urine amylase level Other blood tests include: Complete blood count (CBC) Panel or group of  blood tests that provide an overall picture of your body's chemical balance Imaging tests that can show inflammation of the pancreas include: Ultrasound of the abdomen  (most common) CT scan of the abdomen MRI of the abdomen Treatment 
 
 Treatment may require a stay in the hospital. It may involve: Pain medicines Stopping food or fluids by mouth  Fluids given through a vein (IV) Anti-nausea medicines for nausea and vomiting Low-fat diet The provider may insert a tube through the child's nose or mouth to remove contents of the stomach. The tube will be left in for one or more days. This may be done if vomiting and severe pain don't improve. The child also may be given food through a vein (IV) or a feeding tube. The child can be given solid food once they stop vomiting. Most children are able to take solid food with 1 or 2 days after an attack of acute pancreatitis. In some cases, therapy is needed to: Drain fluid that has collected in or around the pancreas Remove  gallstones Relieve blockages of the pancreatic duct Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most cases go away in a week. Usually, children recover completely. Chronic pancreatitis is rarely seen in children. When it occurs, it is most often due to genetic defects or birth defects of the pancreas or biliary ducts. Possible Complications 
 
 Severe irritation of the pancreas, and pancreatitis due to blunt trauma, such as from a bike handle bar, can cause complications. These may include: Collection of fluid around the  pancreas Buildup of fluid in the abdomen ( ascites ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the provider if your child shows symptoms of pancreatitis. Also call if your child has these symptoms: Intense, constant abdominal pain Develops other symptoms of acute pancreatitis Prevention 
 
 Most of the time, there is no way to prevent pancreatitis. References 
 
 Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF. Pancreatitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 351. Lowe ME. Pancreatitis. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds.  Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 82. Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM.  Pancreatic disease. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, eds.  Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 131. 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia