
 Pancreatic pseudocyst 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pancreatic pseudocyst is a fluid-filled sac in the abdomen. It may also contain tissue from the pancreas, enzymes, and blood. Causes 
 
 The pancreas is an organ located behind the stomach. It produces chemicals (called enzymes) needed to digest food. It also produces the hormones insulin and glucagon. Pancreatic pseudocysts most often develop after an episode of sudden, severe pancreatitis.  Pancreatitis  is sudden swelling of the pancreas. There are many causes of this problem. This problem may sometimes occur:  In someone with chronic  swelling of the pancreas After trauma to the belly, more often in children The cyst happens when the ducts (tubes) in the pancreas are damaged and fluid with enzymes cannot drain. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can occur within days to months after an attack of pancreatitis, and include: Bloating of the abdomen Constant pain or deep ache in the abdomen, which may also be felt in the back  Difficulty eating and digesting food Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may feel your abdomen for a pseudocyst. It will feel like a lump in the middle or left upper abdomen. Tests that may help diagnose pancreatic pseudocyst include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal MRI Abdominal ultrasound Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the size of the pseudocyst and whether it is causing symptoms. Many pseudocysts go away on their own. Those that remain for more than 6 weeks and are larger than 5 cm in diameter often need treatment. Possible treatments include: Drainage through the skin using a needle, most often guided by a CT scan Endoscopic -assisted drainage using an endoscope (a tube containing a camera and a light that is passed down into the stomach) Surgical drainage of the pseudocyst, which involves making a connection between the cyst and the stomach or small intestine. This may be done using a laparoscope.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is generally good with treatment. It is important to make sure that it is not a pancreatic cancer that starts in a cyst, which has a worse outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: A  pancreatic abscess  can develop if the pseudocyst becomes infected. The pseudocyst can break open (rupture), which can be a serious complication because  shock  and excess bleeding (hemorrhage) may develop. The pseudocyst may press down on (compress) nearby organs.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Rupture of the pseudocyst is a medical emergency. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you develop symptoms of bleeding or shock, such as: Fainting Fever and chills Rapid heartbeat Severe abdominal pain  Prevention 
 
 The way to prevent pancreatic pseudocysts is by preventing pancreatitis. If pancreatitis is caused by  gallstones , it is often necessary to remove the gallbladder with surgery (cholecystectomy).  When pancreatitis occurs due to alcohol abuse, you must stop drinking alcohol to prevent future attacks. When pancreatitis occurs due to high blood triglycerides, this condition should be treated. Alternative Names 
 
 Pancreatitis - pseudocyst Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pancreatic pseudocyst, CT scan 
 Pancreas 
 References 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Forsmark CE, Baillie J. AGA Institute Technical Review on acute pancreatitis.  Gastroenterology . 2007;132:2022-2044. PMID: 17484894  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17484894 .
  Tenner SC, Steinberg WM. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Acute pancreatitis 
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 Pancreatic abscess 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia