
 Pantothenic acid and biotin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pantothenic acid and biotin are types of B vitamins. They are water-soluble, which means that the body can't store them. If the body can't use all of the vitamin, the extra vitamins leave the body through the urine. These vitamins must be replaced in the body every day. Function 
 
 Pantothenic acid and biotin are needed for growth. They help the body break down and use food. This is called  metabolism . They are both required for making fatty acids. Pantothenic acid also plays a role in the production of hormones and cholesterol. It is also used in the conversion of pyruvate. Food Sources 
 
 Pantothenic acid is found in foods that are good sources of B vitamins, including the following: Animal proteins Avocado Broccoli, kale, and other vegetables in the cabbage family Eggs Legumes and lentils Milk Mushrooms Organ meats Poultry White and sweet potatoes Whole-grain cereals Yeast  Biotin is found in foods that are good sources of B vitamins, including: Cereal Chocolate Egg yolk Legumes Milk Nuts Organ meats (liver, kidney) Pork Yeast Side Effects 
 
 Pantothenic acid deficiency is very rare, but can cause a tingling feeling in the feet (paresthesia). Biotin deficiency may lead to muscle pain, dermatitis, or glossitis (swelling of the tongue).  Large doses of pantothenic acid do not cause symptoms, other than (possibly)  diarrhea . There are no known toxic symptoms from biotin. Recommendations 
 
 Reference Intakes Recommendations for pantothenic acid and biotin, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the Institute of Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and gender, include: Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA):  average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97 to 98%) healthy people. Adequate Intake (AI):  established when there is not enough evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.  Dietary Reference Intakes for pantothenic acid: Age 0 to 6 months: 1.7* milligrams per day (mg/day) Age 7 to 12 months 1.8* mg/day Age 1 to 3 years: 2* mg/day Age 4 to 8 years: 3* mg/day Age 9 to 13 years: 4* mg/day Age 14 and older: 5* mg/day 6 mg/day during pregnancy Lactation: 7 mg/day   *Adequate Intake (AI) Dietary Reference Intakes for biotin: Age 0 to 6 months: 5* micrograms per day (mcg/day) Age 7 to 12 months: 6* mcg/day Age 1 to 3 years: 8* mcg/day Age 4 to 8 years: 12* mcg/day Age 9 to 13 years: 20* mcg/day Age 14 to 18 years: 25* mcg/day 19 and older: 30* mcg/day  *Adequate Intake (AI) The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods. Specific recommendations depend on age, gender, and other factors (such as pregnancy). Women who are pregnant or breast-feeding need higher amounts. Ask your health care provider which amount is best for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Pantothenic acid; Pantethine; Vitamin B5; Vitamin B7 References 
 
 Hemila H, Chalker E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013: Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board.  Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids.  National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 2000. 25077263  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25077263 . 
  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Salwen MJ. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 Metabolism 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 B Vitamins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia