
 Parathyroid adenoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A parathyroid adenoma is a noncancerous (benign) tumor of the parathyroid glands. The parathyroid glands are located in the neck, near or attached to the back side of the thyroid gland. Causes 
 
 The parathyroid glands in the neck help control calcium use and removal by the body. They do this by producing parathyroid hormone, or PTH. PTH helps control calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels in the blood and is important for healthy bones. Parathyroid adenoma can be due to a genetic problem. It may also be caused by radiation to the neck or taking the drug lithium. Women over age 60 have the highest risk for developing this condition. Radiation to the head or neck also increases risk. Symptoms 
 
 Many people have no symptoms. The condition is often discovered when blood tests are done for another medical reason.  Parathyroid adenomas are the most common cause of hyperparathyroidism (overactive parathyroid glands), which leads to an increased blood calcium level. Symptoms may include any of the following: Confusion Constipation 
   Lack of energy ( lethargy ) Muscle pain Nausea  or decreased appetite Urinating more often at night  Weak bones or fractures Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests may be done to check levels of: PTH Calcium Phosphorus Vitamin D A 24-hour urine test may be done to check for increased calcium in the urine. Other tests include: Bone density exam 
Kidney ultrasound or CT scan (may show kidney stones)
    
   Kidney x-rays (may show kidney stones)
    MRI Neck ultrasound Sestamibi neck scan (to check for swelling of the parathyroid glands)  Treatment 
 
 Surgery is the most common treatment, and it often cures the condition. But, some people choose to only have regular checkups with their health care provider if the condition is mild. To help improve the condition, your provider may ask you to stop taking calcium and vitamin D supplements. Women who have gone through menopause may want to discuss treatment with estrogen. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 When treated, outlook is generally good. Possible Complications 
 
 Osteoporosis  and the increased risk for bone fractures is the most common concern. Other complications are less common, but may include: Nephrocalcinosis  (calcium deposits in the kidneys that can reduce kidney function)
   Osteitis fibrosa cystica  (softened, weak areas in the bones) Complications from surgery include:  Damage to a nerve that controls your voice Damage to the parathyroid glands, which causes  hypoparathyroidism  (lack of enough parathyroid hormone) and low calcium level When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperparathyroidism - parathryoid adenoma; Overactive parathyroid gland - parathyroid adenoma Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Parathyroid glands 
 References 
 
 Silverberg SJ, Bilezikian JP. Primary hyperparathyroidism. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 63. Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia, and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 245. Read More 
 
 Hypercalcemia 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 Osteitis fibrosa 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 
 Review Date 5/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parathyroid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia