
 Parathyroid biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A parathyroid biopsy is the removal of a small piece of a parathyroid gland for examination under a microscope. The parathyroid glands are found just behind the thyroid gland on each side of the neck. How the Test is Performed 
 
 There are two parathyroid glands on each side of the neck, making a total of 4 glands. The parathyroid glands can't be felt with the hands. A parathyroid biopsy is done while you're awake.  Using an ultrasound machine, the health care provider locates the gland that is of concern. A thin needle is inserted directly into the gland, and a small piece of tissue is removed. The procedure takes 10 to 30 minutes.  The tissue is sent to a laboratory, where it is examined under a microscope. The level of  parathyroid hormone  (PTH) in your blood will also be checked. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell your provider if you have any drug allergies or bleeding problems, or if you are pregnant. Make sure the provider knows about all the medicines you're taking, including any herbs or supplements. Tell your provider if you're taking any blood thinning drugs (aspirin, heparin, Lovenox, warfarin). You may have to stop taking them a few days before the procedure. Do NOT stop any medicines on your own. Ask your provider first. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a sting as the needle is inserted into the gland. Most people do not need any pain medicine. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The parathyroid glands release PTH. This hormone controls the level of calcium in the body. This procedure is most often done to rule out the cause of a high parathyroid hormone level. It may also be done if an ultrasound exam shows an enlarged parathyroid gland. Normal Results 
 
 There is no swelling, PTH level is normal, and cells from the tissue sample are normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The test confirms that a parathyroid gland is enlarged if PTH level is too high or cells from the sample are abnormal. Abnormal results may be due to: Noncancerous tumor of the parathyroid gland ( parathyroid adenoma ) Parathyroid cancer  (rare) Enlargement of all 4 parathyroid glands ( parathyroid hyperplasia ) Disorder in which one or more of the endocrine glands are overactive or form a tumor (multiple endocrine neoplasia) ([ MEN I ] or [ MEN II ]) Risks 
 
 The main risks of the procedure are bruising and bleeding into or around the thyroid gland. If bleeding is severe, it may put pressure over the windpipe (trachea). In this case, surgery is needed to correct the problem. This complication is rare. Some people develop temporary hoarseness when the nerve that runs close to the parathyroid glands is injured. This complication is also rare. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - parathyroid Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Parathyroid biopsy 
 References 
 
 Darr EA, Sritharan N, Pellitteri PK, Sofferman RA, Randolph GW. Management of parathyroid disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 124. Read More 
 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Parathyroid adenoma 
 
 Review Date 5/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Parathyroid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia