
 Pellagra 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pellagra is a disease that occurs when a person does not get enough  niacin  (one of the B complex vitamins) or  tryptophan  (an amino acid). Causes 
 
 Pellagra is caused by having too little niacin or tryptophan in the diet. It can also occur if the body fails to absorb these nutrients. It may develop after gastrointestinal diseases or with alcoholism,  HIV/AIDS , or  anorexia . The disease is common in parts of the world where people have a lot of corn in their diet. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of pellagra include: Delusions or mental confusion Diarrhea Nausea (sometimes) Inflamed mucus membranes Scaly skin sores  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. You will be asked about the foods you eat. Tests that may be done include urine tests to check if your body has enough niacin. Blood tests may also be done. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to increase your body's niacin level. You will be prescribed niacin supplements. You may also need to take other supplements. Follow your provider's instructions exactly on how much and how often to take the supplements. Symptoms due to the pellagra, such as skin sores, will be treated. If you have conditions that are causing the pellagra, these will also be treated.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People often do well after taking niacin. Possible Complications 
 
 Left untreated, pellagra can result in nerve damage, especially in the brain. Skin sores may become infected. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any symptoms of pellagra.  Prevention 
 
 Pellagra can be prevented by following a well-balanced diet.  Get treated for health problems that may cause pellagra.  Alternative Names 
 
 Vitamin B3 deficiency; Deficiency - niacin; Nicotinic acid deficiency Images 
 
 
 Vitamin B3 deficit 
 References 
 
 Brown TM. Pellagra: an old enemy of timeless importance.  Psychosomatics . 2010;51:93-97. PMID 20332283  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20332283 . Crook MA. The importance of recognizing pellagra (niacin deficiency) as it still occurs.  Nutrition . 2014;30:729-730. PMID 24679717  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24679717 . Kumar N. Neurologic presentation of nutritional deficiencies.  Neurol Clin . 2010;28:107-170. PMID 19932379  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19932379 . So YT, Simon RP. Deficiency diseases of the nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 57. Read More 
 
 Niacin 
 Tryptophan 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 B Vitamins 
 Malnutrition 
 Browse the Encyclopedia