
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease is an infection of a woman's womb (uterus), ovaries, or fallopian tubes.  Causes 
 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection caused by bacteria. When bacteria from the vagina or cervix travel to your womb, fallopian tubes, or ovaries they can cause an infection. Most of the time, PID is caused by bacteria from  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea . These are sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Having unprotected sex with someone who has an STI can cause PID.  Bacteria can also enter your body during a medical procedure such as: Childbirth Endometrial biopsy  (removing a small piece of your womb lining to test for cancer) Getting an  intrauterine  device (IUD) Miscarriage Abortion  In the United States, nearly 1 million women have PID each year. About 1 in 8 sexually active girls will have PID before age 20. You are more likely to get PID if: You have a sex partner with gonorrhea or chlamydia. You have sex with many different people. You have had an STI in the past. You have recently had PID. You have recently gotten an IUD. You have had sex before age 20.  Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of PID include: Fever Pain or tenderness in the pelvis, lower belly, or lower back Fluid from your vagina  that has an unusual color, texture, or smell  Other symptoms that may occur with PID: Bleeding after intercourse Chills Being  very tired Pain when you urinate Having to urinate often Period cramps  that hurt more than usual or last longer than usual Unusual bleeding or  spotting  during your period Not feeling hungry Nausea and vomiting Skipping your period Pain when you have intercourse  You can have PID and not have any symptoms. For example, chlamydia can cause PID with no symptoms. Women who have an  ectopic pregnancy  or who are  infertile  often have PID caused by chlamydia. An ectopic pregnancy is when an egg grows outside of the uterus. It puts the mother's life in danger.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may do a pelvic exam to look for: Bleeding from your  cervix . The cervix is the opening to your uterus. Fluid coming out of your cervix. Pain when your cervix is touched. Tenderness in your uterus, tubes, or ovaries. You may have lab tests to check for signs of infection: C-reactive protein  (CRP) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) WBC count Other tests include: A swab taken of your vagina or cervix. This sample will be checked for gonorrhea, chlamydia, or other causes of PID. Pelvic ultrasound or CT scan to see what else may be causing your symptoms. Appendicitis or  pockets of infection  around your tubes and ovaries may cause similar symptoms. Pregnancy test . Treatment 
 
 Your provider will often have you start taking antibiotics while waiting for your test results. If you have mild PID: Your provider will give you a shot containing an antibiotic. You will be sent home with antibiotic pills to take for up to 2 weeks. You will need to follow-up closely with your provider.  If you have more severe PID: You may need to stay in the hospital. You may be given antibiotics through a vein (IV). Later, you may be given antibiotic pills to take by mouth.  There are many different antibiotics that can treat PID. Some are safe for pregnant women. Which type you take depends on the cause of the infection. You may receive a different treatment if you have  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia . If your PID is caused by an STI like gonorrhea or chlamydia, your sexual partner must be treated as well. If you have more than 1 sexual partner, they must all be treated. If your partner is not treated, he or she can infect you again, or can infect other people in the future. Both you and your partner must finish taking all of the prescribed antibiotics. Use condoms until you both have finished taking antibiotics.  Possible Complications 
 
 PID infections can cause scarring of the pelvic organs. This can lead to: Chronic pelvic pain Ectopic pregnancy Infertility Tuboovarian abscess  If you have a serious infection that does not improve with antibiotics, you may need surgery. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of PID. You think you have been exposed to an STI. Treatment for a current STI does not seem to be working.  Prevention 
 
 Get prompt treatment for STIs. You can prevent PID by practicing  safe sex . The only absolute way to prevent an STI is to not have sex (abstinence). You can reduce your risk by having a sexual relationship with only 1 person. This is called being monogamous. Your risk will also be reduced if you and your sexual partners get tested for STIs before starting a sexual relationship. Using a condom every time you have sex also reduces your risk.  Here is how you can reduce your risk of PID: Get regular STI screening tests. If you are a new couple, get tested before starting to have sex. Testing can detect infections that are not causing symptoms. If you are a sexually active woman age 24 or younger, get screened each year for chlamydia and gonorrhea. All women with new sexual partners or multiple partners should also be screened.  Alternative Names 
 
 PID; Oophoritis; Salpingitis; Salpingo-oophoritis; Salpingo-peritonitis Images 
 
 
 Pelvic laparoscopy 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Endometritis 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 Birnbaumer DM. Sexually transmitted diseases. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 98. Meyers D, Wolff T, Gregory K, et al. USPSTF recommendations for STI screening.  Am Fam Physician . 2008;77:819-24. PMID: 18386598  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18386598 . Workowski KA, Berman S; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Abortion - surgical 
 Chlamydia 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Ectropion 
 Endometrial biopsy 
 Endometritis 
 Infertility 
 Intrauterine 
 In vitro fertilization (IVF) 
 Miscarriage 
 Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, Obstetrics & Gynecology in Private Practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pelvic Inflammatory Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia