
 Penis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The penis is the male organ used for urination and sexual intercourse. The penis is located above the  scrotum . It is made of spongy tissue and blood vessels. The shaft of the penis surrounds the urethra and is connected to the pubic bone. The foreskin covers the head (glans) of the penis. The foreskin is removed if the boy is circumcised. Information 
 
 During puberty, the penis lengthens. The ability to ejaculate begins at around age 12 to 14. Ejaculation is the release of sperm-containing fluid from the penis during an orgasm. Conditions of the penis include: Chordee -- downward curve of the penis Epispadias  -- urethra opening is on the top or side of the penis, rather than the tip Hypospadias  -- urethra opening is on the underside of the penis, rather than at the tip Palmatus or webbed penis -- penis is enclosed by the scrotum Peyronie's disease  -- a curve during an erection Buried penis -- penis is hidden by a pad of fat Micropenis -- penis does not develop and is small Erectile dysfunction -- inability to achieve or maintain an erection Other related topics include: Ambiguous genitalia Penile  prosthesis Priapism Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 

Chung BI, Sommer G, and Brooks JD. Anatomy of the lower urinary tract and male genitalia. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 2. Elder JS. Anomalies of the penis and urethra. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Saunders Elsevier; 2011:chap 538. Jordan GH, McCammon. Surgery of the penis and urethra. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Palmer JS. Abnormalities of the external genitalia in boys. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 131.  Read More 
 
 Scrotum 
 
 Review Date 4/15/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Penis Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia