
 Peritonitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Peritonitis is an inflammation (irritation) of the peritoneum. This is the thin tissue that lines the inner wall of the abdomen and covers most of the abdominal organs. Causes 
 
 Peritonitis is caused by a collection of blood, body fluids, or pus in the belly ( abdomen ). One type is called spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SPP). It occurs in people with ascites. Ascites is the buildup of fluid in the space between the lining of the abdomen and the organs. This problem is found in people with long-term liver damage, certain cancers, and heart failure. Peritonitis may be a result of other problems. These include: Trauma or wounds to the belly  Ruptured appendix Ruptured diverticula Infection after any surgery in the belly Symptoms 
 
 The belly is very painful or tender. The pain may become worse when the belly is touched or when you move. Your belly may look or feel bloated. This is called  abdominal distention . Other symptoms may include: Fever  and chills Passing little or no stools or gas Excessive fatigue Passing less urine Nausea and vomiting Racing heartbeat Shortness of breath  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. The abdomen is usually tender. It may feel firm or "board-like." People with peritonitis usually curl up or refuse to let anyone touch the area. Blood tests, x-rays, and CT scans may be done. If there is a lot of fluid in the belly area, the provider may use a needle to remove some and send it for testing. Treatment 
 
 The cause must be identified and treated right away. Treatment typically involves surgery and antibiotics. Possible Complications 
 
 Peritonitis can be life threatening and may cause complications. These depend on the type of peritonitis. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of peritonitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Acute abdomen; Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis; SBP; Cirrhosis - spontaneous peritonitis Images 
 
 
 Peritoneal sample 
 Abdominal organs 
 Gastroschisis repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Kuemmerle JF. Inflammatory and anatomic diseases of the intestine, peritoneum, mesentery, and omentum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 142. Levinson ME, Bush LM. Peritonitis and intraperitoneal abscesses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 76. Runyon BA; AASLD. Introduction to the revised American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases Practice Guideline: management of adult patients with ascites due to cirrhosis 2012.  Hepatology . 2013;57(4):1651-1653. PMID: 23463403  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23463403 . Read More 
 
 Abscess - abdomen or pelvis 
 Appendicitis 
 Peritonitis - secondary 
 Peritonitis - spontaneous bacterial 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia