
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a rare disorder in which a pregnant woman's heart becomes weakened and enlarged. It develops during the last month of pregnancy, or within 5 months after the baby is born.  Causes 
 
 Cardiomyopathy  occurs when there is damage to the heart. As a result, the heart muscle becomes weak and does not pump well. This affects the lungs, liver, and other body systems. Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a form of  dilated cardiomyopathy  in which no other cause of heart weakening can be found. It may occur in childbearing women of any age, but it is most common after age 30. Risk factors for the condition include: Obesity Personal history of cardiac disorders such as  myocarditis Use of certain medicines Smoking Alcoholism Multiple pregnancies Old age Pre-ecclampsia African American descent Poor nourishment  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: 
   Fatigue
    Feeling of heart racing or skipping beats (palpitations) Increased nighttime urination (nocturia) 
   Shortness of breath with activity and when lying flat 
   Swelling of the ankles  Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider will look for signs of fluid in the lungs by touching and tapping with the fingers. A stethoscope will be used to listen for lung crackles, a rapid heart rate, or abnormal heart sounds. The liver may be enlarged and neck veins may be swollen. Blood pressure may be low or may drop when standing up. Heart enlargement, congestion of the lungs or the veins in the lungs, decreased cardiac output, decreased movement or functioning of the heart, or  heart failure  may show up on: Chest x-ray Chest CT scan Coronary angiography Echocardiogram Nuclear heart scan Cardiac MRI  A  heart biopsy  may help determine if the underlying cause of cardiomyopathy is a heart muscle infection (myocarditis). However, this procedure is not done very often.  Treatment 
 
 A woman may need to stay in the hospital until  acute  symptoms subside. Because it is very often possible to restore heart function, and the women who have this condition are often young and otherwise healthy, care is often aggressive. When severe symptoms occur, this may include extreme steps such as: Use of an assistive heart pump (aortic counterpulsation balloon, left ventricular assist device) Immunosuppressive therapy (such as medicines used to treat cancer or prevent rejection of a transplanted organ) Heart transplant  if severe congestive heart failure persists  For most women, however, treatment mainly focuses on relieving the symptoms. Some symptoms go away on their own without treatment. Medicines that are often used include: Digitalis to strengthen the heart's pumping ability Diuretics ("water pills") to remove excess fluid Low-dose beta-blockers  Other blood pressure medicines A low-salt diet may be recommended. Fluid may be restricted in some cases. Activities, including nursing the baby, may be limited when symptoms develop. Daily weighing may be recommended. A weight gain of 3 to 4 pounds (1.5 to 2 kilograms) or more over 1 or 2 days may be a sign of fluid buildup. Women who smoke and drink alcohol will be advised to stop, since these habits may make the symptoms worse. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 There are several possible outcomes in peripartum cardiomyopathy. Some women remain stable for long periods, while others get worse slowly. Others get worse very quickly and may be candidates for a heart transplant. About 4% of people will require heart transplantation and 9% may die suddenly or die from complications of the procedure. The outlook is good when a woman's heart returns to normal after the baby is born. If the heart remains abnormal, future pregnancies may result in heart failure. It is not known how to predict who will recover and who will develop severe heart failure. Up to about one half of women will recover completely. Women who develop peripartum cardiomyopathy are at high risk of developing the same problem with future pregnancies. The rate of recurrence is about 30%. Therefore, women who have had this condition should discuss birth control methods with their provider. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Cardiac  arrhythmias  (can be deadly) 
   Congestive heart failure
    Clot formation in the heart which can embolize (travel to other parts of the body) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you are currently pregnant or have recently delivered a baby and think you may have signs of cardiomyopathy. Get medical help right away if you develop chest pain, palpitations, faintness, or other new or unexplained symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Eat a well-balanced diet and get regular exercise to help keep your heart strong. Avoid cigarettes and alcohol. Your provider may advise you to avoid getting pregnant again if you have had heart failure during a previous pregnancy. Alternative Names 
 
 Cardiomyopathy - peripartum; Cardiomyopathy - pregnancy Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy 
 References 
 
 McKenna W, Elliott P. Diseases of the myocardium and endocardium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 60. Warnes CA. Pregnancy and heart disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Arrhythmias 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Dilated cardiomyopathy 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Myocarditis 
 Overweight 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Health Problems in Pregnancy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia