
 Periorbital cellulitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Periorbital cellulitis is an infection of the eyelid or skin around the eye. Causes 
 
 Periorbital cellulitis commonly affects children under 18 months old, though it can occur at any age. This infection can occur after a scratch, injury, or bug bite around the eye, which allows germs to enter the wound. It can also extend from a nearby site that is infected, such as the sinuses. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Redness around the eye or in the white part of the eye Swelling of the eyelid, whites of eyes, and surrounding area  This condition does not often affect vision or cause eye pain. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the eye and ask about the symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood culture Blood tests (complete blood count) CT scan MRI scan Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are given by mouth, by shots, or through a vein (intravenously; IV) to help fight the infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Periorbital cellulitis almost always improves with treatment. In rare cases, the infection spreads into the eye socket, the tissues that surround the eye, and the eyeball itself. This infection is called  orbital cellulitis . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if: The eye becomes red or swollen Symptoms get worse after treatment Fever develops along with eye symptoms It is difficult or painful to move the eye The eye looks like it is sticking (bulging) out There are vision changes Alternative Names 
 
 Preseptal cellulitis Images 
 
 
 Haemophilus influenza organism 
 Periorbital cellulitis 
 Haemophilus influenza organism 
 References 
 
 Durand ML. Periocular infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 118. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl ED, Ariss MM, Lindquist TP. Orbital infections. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 634. 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cellulitis 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia