
 Pertussis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pertussis is a highly contagious bacterial disease that causes uncontrollable, violent coughing. The coughing can make it hard to breathe. A deep "whooping" sound is often heard when the person tries to take a breath. Causes 
 
 Pertussis, or whooping cough, is an upper respiratory infection. It is caused by the  Bordetella pertussis  bacteria. It is a serious disease that can affect people of any age and cause permanent disability in infants, and even death. When an infected person sneezes or coughs, tiny droplets containing the bacteria move through the air. The disease is easily spread from person to person. The infection often lasts 6 weeks, but it can last as long as 10 weeks. Symptoms 
 
 Initial symptoms are similar to the  common cold . In most cases, they develop about a week after exposure to the bacteria. Severe episodes of coughing start about 10 to 12 days later. In infants and young children, the coughing sometimes ends with a "whoop" noise. The sound is produced when the person tries to take a breath. The whoop noise is rare in infants under 6 months of age and in older children or adults. Coughing spells may lead to vomiting or a short loss of consciousness. Pertussis should always be considered when vomiting occurs with coughing. In infants,  choking  spells and long pauses in breathing are common. Other pertussis symptoms include: Runny nose Slight  fever , 102°F (38.9°C) or lower Diarrhea Exams and Tests 
 
 The initial diagnosis is most often based on the symptoms. However, when the symptoms are not obvious, pertussis may be hard to diagnose. In very young infants, the symptoms may be caused by pneumonia instead. To know for sure, the health care provider may take a sample of mucus from the nasal secretions. The sample is sent to a lab and tested for pertussis. While this can offer an accurate diagnosis, the test takes some time. Most of the time, treatment is started before the results are ready. Some people may have a  complete blood count  that shows large numbers of lymphocytes. Treatment 
 
 If started early enough, antibiotics such as erythromycin can make the symptoms go away more quickly. Unfortunately, most people are diagnosed too late, when antibiotics aren't very effective. However, the medicines can help reduce the person's ability to spread the disease to others. Infants younger than 18 months need constant supervision because their breathing may temporarily stop during coughing spells. Infants with severe cases should be hospitalized. An oxygen tent with high humidity may be used. Fluids may be given through a vein if coughing spells are severe enough to prevent the person from drinking enough fluids. Sedatives (medicines to make you sleepy) may be prescribed for young children. Cough mixtures, expectorants, and suppressants are most often not helpful. These medicines should NOT be used. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In older children, the outlook is most often very good. Infants have the highest risk for death, and need careful monitoring. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Pneumonia Convulsions Seizure disorder (permanent) Nosebleeds Ear infections Brain damage from lack of oxygen Bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage) Intellectual disability Slowed or stopped breathing ( apnea ) Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child develops symptoms of pertussis.  
Call 911 or get to an emergency room if the person has any of the following symptoms: Bluish skin  color, which indicates a lack of oxygen
    Periods of stopped breathing ( apnea )
    Seizures  or  convulsions High  fever Persistent  vomiting Dehydration Prevention 
 
 DTaP vaccination , one of the recommended childhood immunizations, protects children against pertussis infection. DTaP vaccine can be safely given to infants. Five DTaP vaccines are recommended. They are most often given to children at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 15 to 18 months, and 4 to 6 years. The  TdaP vaccine  should be given at age 11 or 12. During a pertussis outbreak, unimmunized children under age 7 should not attend school or public gatherings. They should also be isolated from anyone known or suspected to be infected. This should last until 14 days after the last reported case. It is also recommended that adults age 19 and older receive 1 dose of the TdaP vaccine against pertussis. TdaP is especially important for health care professionals and anyone having close contact with a baby younger than 12 months old. Pregnant women should get a dose of TdaP during every pregnancy between 27 and 36 weeks of pregnancy, to protect the newborn from pertussis. Alternative Names 
 
 Whooping cough Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system overview 
 References 
 
 Braman SS. Postinfectious cough: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines.  Chest . 2006;129(1):138S-146S. PMID: 16428703  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16428703 . Kim DK, Bridges CB, Harriman KH; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP); ACIP Adult Immunization Work Group. Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older -- United States, 2015.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2015; 6;64(4):91-92. PMID:25654609  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25654609 . Long SS. Pertussis (Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella parapertussis). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 197. Strikas RA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP); ACIP Child/Adolescent Immunization Work Group. Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization schedules for persons aged 0 through 18 years -- United States, 2015.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2015; 6;64(4):93-94. PMID: 25654610  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25654610 . United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine information statement: Tdap vaccine (Tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis). Available at:  www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/tdap.pdf . Accessed August 7, 2015. Read More 
 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Common cold 
 Otitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Whooping Cough 
 Browse the Encyclopedia