
 Pharyngitis - viral 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pharyngitis , or sore throat, is swelling, discomfort, pain, or scratchiness in the throat at and just below the tonsils. Causes 
 
 Pharyngitis may occur as part of a viral infection that also involves other organs, such as the lungs or bowel. Most sore throats are caused by viruses. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of pharyngitis may include: Discomfort when swallowing Fever Joint pain  or  muscle aches Sore throat Tender  swollen lymph nodes  in the neck  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider usually diagnoses pharyngitis by examining your throat. A lab test of fluid from your throat will show that bacteria (such as group A  Streptococcus , or strep) is not the cause of your sore throat. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for viral pharyngitis. You can relieve symptoms by gargling with warm salt water several times a day (use one half teaspoon or 3 grams of salt in a glass of warm water). Taking anti-inflammatory medicine, such as acetaminophen, can control fever. Excessive use of anti-inflammatory lozenges or sprays may make a sore throat worse. It is important NOT to take antibiotics when a sore throat is due to a viral infection. The antibiotics will not help. Using them to treat viral infections helps bacteria become resistant to antibiotics. With some sore throats (such as those caused by infectious  mononucleosis ), the lymph nodes in the neck may become very swollen. Your provider may prescribe anti-inflammatory drugs, such as prednisone, to treat them. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms usually go away within a week to 10 days. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of viral pharyngitis are extremely uncommon. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your provider if symptoms last longer than expected, or do not improve with self-care. Always seek medical care if you have a sore throat and have extreme discomfort or difficulty swallowing or breathing. Prevention 
 
 Most sore throats cannot be prevented because the germs that cause them are in our environment. However, always wash your hands after contact with a person who has a sore throat. Also avoid kissing or sharing cups and eating utensils with people who are sick. Images 
 
 
 Oropharynx 
 References 
 
 Melio FR, Berge LR. Upper respiratory tract infections. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 75.  Nussenbaum B, Bradford CR. Pharyngitis in adults. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LV, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 9. Weber R. Pharyngitis.  Prim Care . 2014;41(1):91-98. PMID: 24439883  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24439883 . Read More 
 
 Pharyngitis - sore throat 
 
 Review Date 1/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sore Throat 
 Browse the Encyclopedia