
 Phenobarbital overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Phenobarbital is a medicine used to treat  epilepsy , anxiety, and insomnia. Phenobarbital overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this medicine. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Phenobarbital Where Found 
 
 Other names for this drug are: Barbita Comizial Gardenale Fenilcal Luminal Solfoton Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.  Symptoms 
 
 Heart and blood vessels: Heart failure Low blood pressure Weak pulse  Kidneys and bladder: Kidney failure (possible)  Lungs: Difficulty breathing Slowed or stopped breathing Pneumonia (possible)  Nervous system: Coma Confusion Decreased energy Delirium  (confusion and agitation) Headache Sleepiness Slurred speech Unsteady gait  Skin: Large  blisters Rash  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the pill container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room  
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood tests will be done to check the phenobarbital level. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  This list may not be all-inclusive. Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 How well the person does depends on the severity of the overdose and how quickly treatment is received. If there has been prolonged coma and shock (damage to multiple internal organs), a more serious outcome is possible.  Alternative Names 
 
 Luminal overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011.  Gussow L, Carlson, A.Sedative Hypnotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 165. 
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia