
 Phenothiazine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Phenothiazines are medicines used to treat serious mental and emotional disorders, and to reduce nausea. This article discusses an overdose of phenothiazines.  Overdose  occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of a certain substance. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredient is phenothiazine, which may be found in many medicines. Where Found 
 
 These medicines contain phenothiazine: Acetophenazine Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) Chlorprothixene (Taractan) Clozapine (Clozaril) Fluphenazine (Prolixin) Haloperidol (Haldol) Loxapine (Loxitane) Mesoridazine (Serentil) Molindone (Moban) Perphenazine (Trilafon) Pimozide (Orap) Prochlorperazine (Compazine) Promazine (Sparine) Thioridazine (Mellaril) Thiothixene (Navane) Trifluoperazine (Stelazine) Triflupromazine Promethazine (Phenergan) Other medicines may also contain phenothiazine. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of a phenothiazine overdose in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS No breathing Rapid breathing Shallow breathing  BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Cannot urinate EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Blurred vision Congested nose Drooling Dry mouth Swallowing difficulties Sores in the mouth, on the tongue, or in the throat Vision color changes (things look brownish) Yellow eyes  HEART AND BLOOD High or very low blood pressure Irregular heartbeat Rapid heartbeat  MUSCLES AND JOINTS Muscle spasms, particularly of the neck, face, and back Muscle stiffness  NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Clumsiness Coma Confusion Convulsions Deep sleep Difficulty walking or a shuffling gait Fainting Hallucinations (rare) Lack of coordination Irritability Needing to move, restlessness Tremor Weakness  
SKIN Rapid sunburn if exposed to the sun Bluish skin (changing to purplish)  STOMACH AND INTESTINAL TRACT Constipation Loss of appetite Nausea  OTHER Changes in menstrual pattern in women, from long-term use Fever Low body temperature Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away.  Do NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the medicine, and strength, if known The amount swallowed The time it was swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and tube through the mouth into the lungs  Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced brain imaging) EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous (IV) fluids through a vein Laxative Medicine to reverse the effects of the drug Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (gastric lavage) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery depends on the amount of damage. Survival past 2 days is usually a good sign. Nervous system symptoms may be permanent. The most serious side effects are usually due to damage to the heart. If heart damage can be stabilized, recovery is likely. References 
 
 Kellerman RD. Physical and chemical injuries. In: Kellerman RD, ed.  Conn's Current Therapy 2015 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 21. Levine M, Burns MJ. Antipsychotic agents. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 38. Nockowitz RA, Rund DA. Psychotropic medications. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 290. Velez LI, Feng S-Y. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150. Wittler MA, Lavonas EJ. Antipsychotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 161. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia