
 Philodendron poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Philodendron is a flowering houseplant. Philodendron poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of this plant. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredient is: 
Calcium oxalate
   Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of this type of poisoning include: Burning and painful eyes Burning in mouth and throat Diarrhea Irritated skin Nausea and vomiting Slurred speech Swelling of mouth Swelling of tongue Blistering and swelling in the mouth may be severe enough to prevent normal speaking and swallowing. Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. Wipe out the mouth with a cold, wet cloth. Wash off any plant sap from the skin and eyes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name and part of the plant swallowed, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. For severe reactions, the person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support Fluids by IV (through the vein) Medicines to treat symptoms Laxatives Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia