
 Phlegmasia cerulea dolens 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Phlegmasia cerulea dolens is an uncommon, severe form of  deep venous thrombosis  (blood clots in the vein). It most often occurs in the upper leg. Causes 
 
 Phlegmasia cerulea dolens is preceded by a condition called phlegmasia alba dolens. This is occurs when the leg is swollen and white due to a clot in a deep vein that blocks blood flow. Symptoms 
 
 Pain,  swelling , and bluish-skin coloring affect the area below the blocked vein. Possible Complications 
 
 Continued clotting can lead to increased swelling. The swelling can interfere with blood flow. This complication is called phlegmasia alba dolens. It causes the skin to turn white. Phlegmasia alba dolens may lead to tissue death (gangrene) and the need for amputation. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical help right away if an arm or leg is severely swollen, blue, or painful. Alternative Names 
 
 Deep vein thrombosis - Phlegmasia cerulea dolens; DVT - Phlegmasia cerulea dolens; Phlegmasia alba dolens Images 
 
 
 Venous blood clot 
 References 
 
 Ginsberg JS. Peripheral venous disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 81. Kline JA. Pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 88. Lim W. Venous thromboembolism. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 144. Read More 
 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Deep Vein Thrombosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia