
 Pinworms 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pinworms are small worms that infect the intestines. Causes 
 
 Pinworms are the most common worm infection in the United States. They are most common in school-age children. Pinworm eggs are spread directly from person to person. They can also be spread by touching bedding, food, or other items that are contaminated with the eggs. Typically, children are infected by touching pinworm eggs without knowing it and then putting their fingers in their mouth. They swallow the eggs, which eventually hatch in the small intestine. The worms mature in the colon. Female worms then move to the child's anal area, especially at night, and deposit more eggs. This may cause intense itching. The area may even become infected. When the child scratches the anal area, the eggs can get under the child's fingernails. These eggs can be transferred to other children, family members, and items in the house. Symptoms 
 
 Difficulty sleeping due to the itching that occurs during the night Intense  itching  around the anus Irritability due to itching and interrupted sleep Irritated or infected skin around the anus, from constant scratching Irritation or discomfort of the vagina in young girls (if an adult worm enters the vagina rather than the anus) Loss of appetite and weight (uncommon, but can occur in severe infections) Exams and Tests 
 
 Pinworms can be spotted in the anal area, especially at night when the worms lay their eggs there. Your health care provider may have you do a  tape test . A piece of cellophane tape is pressed against the skin around the anus, and removed. This should be done in the morning before bathing or using the toilet, because bathing and wiping may remove eggs. The provider will stick the tape to a slide and look for eggs using a microscope. Treatment 
 
 Anti-worm medicines are used to kill the pinworms (not their eggs). Your provider will likely recommend one dose of medicine that is available over-the-counter and by prescription. More than one household member is likely to be infected, so the entire household is often treated. Another dose is usually repeated after 2 weeks. This treats worms that hatched since the first treatment. To control the eggs: Clean toilet seats daily Keep fingernails short and clean Wash all bed linens twice a week Wash hands before meals and after using the toilet  Avoid scratching the infected area around the anus. This can contaminate your fingers and everything else that you touch. Keep your hands and fingers away from your nose and mouth unless they are freshly washed. Be extra careful while family members are being treated for pinworms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pinworm infection is fully treatable. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: You or your child has symptoms of pinworm infection You have seen pinworms on your child Prevention 
 
 Wash hands after using the bathroom and before preparing food. Wash bedding and underclothing frequently, especially those of any affected family members. Alternative Names 
 
 Enterobiasis; Oxyuriasis; Threadworm; Seatworm; Enterobius vermicularis; E vermicularis; Helminthic infection Images 
 
 
 Pinworm eggs 
 Pinworm, close-up of the head 
 Pinworms 
 References 
 
 Dent AE, Kazura JW. Enterobiasis (Enterobius Vermicularis). In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 286. Fritsche TR, Selvarangan R. Medical Parasitology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pinworms 
 Browse the Encyclopedia