
 Piperonyl butoxide with pyrethrins poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Piperonyl butoxide with pyrethrins is an ingredient found in medicines to kill lice. Poisoning occurs when someone swallows the product or too much of the product touches the skin. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The ingredients include: Piperonyl butoxide Pyrethrins The poisonous ingredients may go by other names. Where Found 
 
 These products contain piperonyl butoxide with pyrethrins: A-200 Barc (also contains petroleum distillates) Blue (also contains petroleum distillates) Control-L (also contains petroleum distillates) End Lice Lice-Enz Foam Kit Pronto Pyrinex Pediculicide (also contains petroleum distillates) Pyrinyl (also contains kerosene) Pyrinyl II Pyrinyl Plus R & C spray Rid (also contains petroleum distillates and benzyl alcohol) Tisit Tisit Blue (also contains petroleum distillates) Triple X Kit (also contains petroleum distillates) Products with other names may also contain piperonyl butoxide with pyrethrins. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of poisoning from these products include: Chest pain Coma Convulsions Difficulty breathing Eye irritation  if it touches the eyes Muscle weakness Nausea and vomiting Rash ( allergic reaction ) Salivating more than ususal Shortness of breath Skin hypersensitivity Sneezing Tremors Wheezing Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do not make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the chemical is in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed The amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Cleaning of exposed skin Washing and examination of eyes as needed Treatment of allergic reactions as needed If the poison was swallowed, treatment may include: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs (extreme cases) Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (gastric lavage) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most symptoms are seen in people who are allergic to pyrethrins. Piperonyl butoxide is not very toxic, but extreme exposures may result in more severe symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Pyrethrins poisoning; Lice medicine poisoning References 
 
 Borron, SW. Pyrethrins, repellants, and other pesticides. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 77 Cannon RD, Ruha A-M. Insecticides, herbicides, and rodenticides. In: Adams JG, Barton ED, Collings JL, DeBlieux PMC, Gisondi MA, Nadel ES, eds.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 146. Rhee JW. Pesticides. In: Marx, JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 163. Robey WC III, Meggs WJ. Insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 182. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia