
 Pituitary tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pituitary tumor is an abnormal growth in the pituitary gland. The pituitary is a small gland at the base of the brain. It regulates the body's balance of many hormones. Causes 
 
 Most pituitary tumors are noncancerous ( benign ). Up to 20% of people have pituitary tumors. Many of these tumors do not cause symptoms and are never diagnosed during the person's lifetime. The pituitary gland is a pea-sized  endocrine  gland located at the base of the brain. The pituitary helps control the release of hormones from other endocrine glands, such as the thyroid, sex glands (testes or ovaries), and  adrenal glands . The pituitary also releases hormones that directly affect body tissues, such as bones and the breast milk glands. The pituitary hormones include: Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Growth hormone (GH) Prolactin Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) Watch this video about: Pituitary gland As a pituitary tumor grows, the normal hormone-releasing cells of the pituitary may be damaged. This results in the pituitary gland not producing enough of its hormones. This condition is called  hypopituitarism . The causes of pituitary tumors are unknown. Some tumors are part of a hereditary disorder called  multiple endocrine neoplasia I  (MEN I). The pituitary gland can be affected by brain tumors that develop in the same part of the brain, resulting in similar symptoms. Symptoms 
 
 Some pituitary tumors produce too much of one or more hormones. As a result, symptoms of 1 or more of the following conditions can occur: Hyperthyroidism  (thyroid gland makes too much of its hormones; this is an extremely rare condition of pituitary tumors) Cushing syndrome  (body has a higher than normal level of the hormone cortisol) Gigantism  (abnormal growth due to higher than normal level of growth hormone during childhood) or  acromegaly  (higher than normal level of growth hormone in adults) Nipple discharge  and irregular or absent menstrual periods in women
  Decreased sexual function in men
  Symptoms caused by pressure from a larger pituitary tumor may include: Changes in vision such as double vision, visual field loss, drooping eyelids or changes in color vision Headache Lack of energy Nasal drainage of clear fluid Nausea and vomiting Problems with the sense of smell In rare cases, these symptoms occur suddenly and can be severe ( pituitary apoplexy ). Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical examination. The provider will note any problems with double vision and visual field, such as a loss of side (peripheral) vision or the ability to see in certain areas. The exam will check for signs of too much cortisol (Cushing syndrome) or too much growth hormone (acromegaly). Tests to check endocrine function may be ordered, including: Cortisol levels:  dexamethasone suppression test ,  urine cortisol  test FSH  level Insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-1) level LH  level Prolactin level Testosterone/estradiol levels Thyroid hormone levels:  free T4 test ,  TSH test Tests that help confirm the diagnosis include the following: Visual fields  MRI of head Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the tumor is often needed, especially if the tumor is pressing on the optic nerves (nerves that control vision). Most of the time, pituitary tumors can be surgically removed through the nose and sinuses. If the tumor cannot be removed this way, it is removed through the skull. Radiation therapy  may be used to shrink the tumor in people who cannot have surgery. It may also be used if the tumor returns after surgery. In some cases, medicines are prescribed to shrink certain types of tumors. Support Groups 
 
 Pituitary Network Association:  www.pituitary.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the tumor can be surgically removed, the outlook is fair to good, depending on whether the entire tumor is removed. Possible Complications 
 
 The most serious complication is blindness. This can occur if the optic nerve is seriously damaged. The tumor or its removal may cause lifelong hormone imbalances. The affected hormones may need to be replaced, and you may need to take medicine for the rest of your life. Surgery can sometimes damage the posterior pituitary (back part of the gland). This can lead to  diabetes insipidus , a condition with symptoms of frequent urination and extreme thirst. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop any symptoms of a pituitary tumor. Alternative Names 
 
 Tumor - pituitary; Pituitary adenoma Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Melmed S, Kleinberg D. Pituitary masses and tumors. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 9. Muh CR, Oyesiku NM. Pituitary tumors. In: Ellenbogen RG, Abdulrauf SI, Sekhar LN, eds.  Principles of Neurological Surgery . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 ACTH blood test 
 Cancer 
 Craniopharyngioma 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Cyst 
 Endocrine glands 
 Gigantism 
 Growth hormone test 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Prolactin blood test 
 Prolactinoma 
 TSH test 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pituitary Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia