
 Pituitary apoplexy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pituitary apoplexy is a rare, but serious condition of the pituitary gland. Causes 
 
 The pituitary is a small gland at the base of the brain. The pituitary produces many of the hormones that control essential body processes. Pituitary apoplexy can be caused by bleeding into the pituitary or by blocked blood flow of the pituitary. Apoplexy means bleeding into an organ or loss of blood flow to an organ. Pituitary apoplexy is commonly caused by bleeding inside a noncancerous ( benign ) tumor of the pituitary. The pituitary is damaged when the tumor suddenly enlarges and either bleeds into the pituitary or blocks blood supply to the pituitary. When pituitary bleeding occurs in a woman during or right after childbirth, it is called  Sheehan syndrome . This is a very rare condition. Risk factors for pituitary apoplexy in non-pregnant people without a tumor include: Bleeding disorders Diabetes Head injury Radiation to the pituitary gland Use of a breathing machine Pituitary apoplexy in these situations is very rare. Symptoms 
 
 Pituitary apoplexy usually has a short period of symptoms (acute), which can be life threatening. Symptoms often include: Severe headache (worst of your life) Paralysis of the eye muscles, causing double vision ( ophthalmoplegia ) or problems opening an eyelid Low blood pressure, nausea, loss of appetite, and vomiting from  acute adrenal insufficiency Personality changes due to sudden narrowing of one of the arteries in the brain (anterior cerebral artery) Less commonly, pituitary dysfunction may appear more slowly. In Sheehan syndrome, for example, the first symptom may be a failure to produce milk caused by a lack of the hormone prolactin. Over time, problems with other pituitary hormones may develop, causing symptoms of the following conditions: Growth hormone deficiency Adrenal insufficiency (if not already present or treated) Hypogonadism  (body's sex glands produce little or no hormones) Hypothyroidism  (thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone) In rare cases, when the posterior (back part) of the pituitary is involved, symptoms may include: Failure of the uterus to contract to give birth to a baby (in women) Failure to produce breast milk (in women) Frequent urination and severe thirst Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Eye exams MRI  or  CT scan Blood tests will be done to check levels of: ACTH Cortisol FSH Growth hormone LH Prolactin TSH Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)  Sodium Osmolarity in blood and urine Treatment 
 
 Acute apoplexy may require surgery to relieve pressure on the pituitary and improve vision symptoms. Severe cases need emergency surgery. If vision is not affected, surgery is often not necessary. Immediate treatment with adrenal replacement hormones (glucocorticoids) is needed. These hormones are often given through the vein (by IV). Other hormones may eventually be replaced, including: Growth hormone Sex hormones (estrogen/testosterone) Thyroid hormone Vasopressin (ADH) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Acute pituitary apoplexy can be life threatening. The outlook is good for people who have long-term (chronic) pituitary deficiency that is diagnosed and treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of untreated pituitary apoplexy can include: Adrenal crisis Vision loss  If other missing hormones are not replaced, symptoms of hypothyroidism and hypogonadism may develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any symptoms of chronic pituitary insufficiency. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of acute pituitary apoplexy, including: Eye weakness or vision loss Sudden, severe headache Low blood pressure (which can cause fainting) Nausea Vomiting If you develop these symptoms and you have already been diagnosed with a pituitary tumor, seek medical help right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Pituitary infarction; Pituitary tumor apoplexy Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Melmed S, Kleinberg D. Pituitary masses and tumors. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 9. Nelson BK. Pituitary apoplexy. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 170. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 Hypothalamus 
 Sheehan syndrome 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pituitary Disorders 
 Pituitary Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia