
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris is a rare skin disorder that causes constant inflammation and  scaling  (exfoliation) of the skin. Causes 
 
 There are many different types of pityriasis rubra pilaris. The cause is unknown, although genetic factors, an abnormal immune response, or vitamin A deficiency may be involved. Symptoms 
 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris is a chronic (life-long) skin condition in which orange-red scaly patches, and thick skin develop on the hands and feet. The scaly areas cover much of the body. Small islands of normal skin (islands of sparing) are seen within the areas of the scaly skin. The scaly areas may be itchy. There may be changes in the nails. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine your skin. Diagnosis is usually made because of the unique skin lesions. (A lesion is an abnormal area on the skin). Treatment 
 
 Topical creams containing urea, lactic acid, retinoids, and steroids may help. More commonly, treatment includes pills taken by mouth such as isotretinoin, acitretin, or methotrexate. Exposure to ultraviolet light (light therapy) may also help. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of pityriasis rubra pilaris. Also call if you have the disorder and symptoms worsen. Images 
 
 
 Pitted keratolysis 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris on the chest 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris on the feet 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris on the palms 
 Pityriasis rubra pilaris - close-up 
 References 
 
 James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Pityriasis rosea, pityriasis rubra pilaris, and other papulosquamous and hyperkeratotic diseases. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 11. Tobin AM, Kirby B. Pityriasis rubra pilaris. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 187. Read More 
 
 Scales 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia