
 Plastic resin hardener poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Poisoning can occur from swallowing plastic resin hardener. Resin hardener fumes may also be poisonous. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Epoxy and resin can be poisonous if they are swallowed, or if their fumes are breathed in. Where Found 
 
 Plastic resin hardeners are found in various epoxy and resin products. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of poisoning from plastic resin hardeners in different parts of the body. Airways and lungs Breathing difficulty  (from breathing in fumes) Rapid breathing  Eyes, ears, nose, and throat Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue Throat  swelling  (which may also cause breathing difficulty) Vision loss Heart and blood vessels Low blood pressure (develops rapidly) Collapse  Stomach and intestines Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting, possibly bloody Burns of the food pipe (esophagus) Blood in the stool  Skin Irritation Burns Holes in the skin or tissues under the skin Home Care 
 
 Seek emergency medical help right away. If the resin is on the skin, wash the area thoroughly for at least 15 minutes. Contact poison control for further information. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed or fumes were breathed in Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Bronchoscopy (camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs) Endoscopy (camera down the throat to see burns to the esophagus and stomach) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous (through a vein) fluids Laxatives Medicine to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin (debridement) Tube through the nose into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Washing of the skin (irrigation) every few hours for several days  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a patient does depends on the amount of poison swallowed or breathed in, and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a patient gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Swallowing this type of poison can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, eyes, lungs, esophagus, nose, and stomach are possible. The outcome depends on the extent of this damage. Damage continues to occur to the esophagus and stomach for several weeks after the poison was swallowed. Death may occur up to a month later. Treatment may require removal of part of the esophagus and stomach. References 
 
 Elijah IE, Sanford AP, Lee JO. Chemical burns. In: Gerndon DN, Jones JH, eds.  Total Burn Care . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 41. Holland MG. Occupational toxicology. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 82. Wax PM, Walls RM. Caustics. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia