
 Pleurisy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pleurisy is an inflammation of the lining of the lungs and chest (the pleura) that leads to chest pain when you take a breath or cough. Causes 
 
 Pleurisy may develop when you have lung inflammation due to infection, such as a viral infection,  pneumonia , or  tuberculosis .  It may also occur with: Asbestos-related disease Certain cancers Chest trauma Blood clot ( pulmonary embolus )
    Rheumatoid arthritis Lupus Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom of pleurisy is pain in the chest. This pain often occurs when you take a deep breath in or out, or cough. Some people feel the pain in the shoulder. Deep breathing, coughing, and chest movement make the pain worse. Pleurisy can cause fluid to collect inside the chest. This can make it harder to breathe. It can cause the following symptoms: Coughing Shortness of breath Rapid breathing Exams and Tests 
 
 When you have pleurisy, the normally smooth surfaces lining the lung (the pleura) become rough. They rub together with each breath. This results in a rough, grating sound called a friction rub. Your health care provider can hear this sound with the stethoscope. The provider may order the following tests: CBC X-ray of the chest CT scan of the chest Ultrasound  of the chest Removal of pleural fluid with a needle ( thoracentesis )
   Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the pleurisy. Bacterial infections are treated with antibiotics. Surgery may be needed to drain infected fluid from the lungs. Viral infections normally run their course without medicines.  Taking acetaminophen or ibuprofen can help reduce pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery depends on the cause of the pleurisy. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may develop from pleurisy include: Breathing difficulty Fluid buildup between chest wall and lung Complications from the original illness When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of pleurisy. If you have breathing difficulty or your skin turns blue, seek medical care right away. Prevention 
 
 Early treatment of bacterial respiratory infections can prevent pleurisy. Alternative Names 
 
 Pleuritis; Pleuritic chest pain Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system overview 
 References 
 
 Fenster BE, Lee-Chiong T, Gebhart GF, Matthay RA. Chest pain. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 31. McCool FD. Diseases of the diaphragm, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 99. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Hyperventilation 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia