
 Plummer-Vinson syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Plummer-Vinson syndrome is a condition that can occurs in people with long-term (chronic)  iron deficiency anemia . People with this condition have problems swallowing due to small, thin growths of tissue that partially block the upper food pipe (esophagus). Causes 
 
 The cause of Plummer-Vinson syndrome is unknown. Genetic factors and a lack of certain nutrients (nutritional deficiencies) may play a role. It is a rare disorder that can be linked to cancers of the esophagus and throat. It is more common in women. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Difficulty swallowing Weakness  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will do an exam to look for abnormal areas on your skin and nails. You may have an  upper GI series  or  upper endoscopy  to look for abnormal tissue in the food pipe. You may have tests to look for anemia or iron deficiency.  Treatment 
 
 Taking iron supplements may improve the swallowing problems. If supplements do not help, the web of tissue can be widened during upper endoscopy. This will allow you to swallow food normally.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this condition generally respond to treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Devices used to stretch the esophagus (dilators) may cause a tear. This can lead to bleeding. Plummer-Vinson syndrome has been linked to  esophageal cancer . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Food gets stuck after you swallow it You have severe fatigue and weakness Prevention 
 
 Getting enough iron in your diet may prevent this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Paterson-Kelly syndrome; Sideropenic dysphagia; Esophageal web Images 
 
 
 Esophagus and stomach anatomy 
 References 
 
 Long JD, Orlando RC. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the esophagus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Esophageal cancer 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia