
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumonia is a breathing (respiratory) condition in which there is an infection of the lung. This article covers community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). This type of pneumonia is found in people who have not recently been in the hospital or another health care facility such as a nursing home or rehab facility. Pneumonia that affects people in health care facilities, such as hospitals is called  hospital-acquired pneumonia .  Causes 
 
 Pneumonia is a common illness that affects millions of people each year in the United States. Germs called bacteria, viruses, and fungi may cause pneumonia. In adults, bacteria are the most common cause of pneumonia. Ways you can get pneumonia include: Bacteria and viruses living in your nose, sinuses, or mouth may spread to your lungs. You may breathe some of these germs directly into your lungs. You breathe in (inhale) food, liquids, vomit, or fluids from the mouth into your lungs ( aspiration pneumonia )  Pneumonia can be caused by many types of germs. The most common type of bacteria is  Streptococcus pneumoniae  (pneumococcus). Atypical pneumonia , often called walking pneumonia, is caused by other bacteria. A fungus called  Pneumocystis jiroveci  can cause pneumonia in people whose immune system is not working well, especially people with advanced HIV infection. Viruses , such as the flu virus, are also a common cause of pneumonia.  Risk factors that increase your chance of getting pneumonia include: Chronic lung disease ( COPD ,  bronchiectasis ,  cystic fibrosis ) Cigarette smoking Dementia, stroke, brain injury,  cerebral palsy , or other brain disorders Immune system problem (during cancer treatment, or due to HIV/AIDS, organ transplant, or other diseases) Other serious illnesses, such as  heart disease , liver  cirrhosis , or  diabetes mellitus Recent surgery or trauma Surgery to treat cancer of the mouth, throat, or neck  Symptoms 
 
 The most common symptoms of pneumonia are: Cough  (with some pneumonias you may cough up greenish or yellow mucous, or even  bloody mucus ) Fever , which may be mild or high Shaking chills Shortness of breath  (may only occur when you climb stairs or exert yourself)  Other symptoms include: Confusion , especially in older people Excess sweating and clammy skin Headache Loss of appetite , low energy, and  fatigue Malaise  (not feeling well) Sharp or stabbing chest pain that gets worse when you breathe deeply or cough White nail syndrome, or leukonychia  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen for crackles or abnormal breath sounds when listening to your chest with a stethoscope. Tapping on your chest wall (percussion) helps the provider listen and feel for abnormal sounds in your chest. If pneumonia is suspected, the provider will likely order a chest x-ray. Other tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gases  to see if enough oxygen is getting into your blood from the lungs. Blood  and  sputum cultures  to look for the germ that may be causing the pneumonia. CBC  to check white blood cell count. CT scan of the chest . Bronchoscopy . A flexible tube with a lighted camera on the end passed down to your lungs, in selected cases. Thoracentesis . Removing fluid from the space between the outside lining of the lungs and the chest wall.  Treatment 
 
 Your doctor must first decide whether you need to be in the hospital. If you are treated in the hospital, you will receive: Fluids and antibiotics through your veins Oxygen therapy Breathing treatments (possibly)  If you are diagnosed with a bacterial form of pneumonia, it is important that you are started on antibiotics very soon after you are admitted. If you have viral pneumonia, you will not receive antibiotics. This is because antibiotics do not kill viruses. You may receive other medicines, such as antivirals, if you have the flu. You are more likely to be admitted to the hospital if you: Have another serious medical problem Have severe symptoms Are unable to care for yourself at home, or are unable to eat or drink Are older than 65 Have been taking antibiotics at home and are not getting better  Many people can be treated at home. If so, your doctor may tell you to take medicines such as antibiotics. When taking antibiotics: DO NOT miss any doses. Take the medicine until it is gone, even when you start to feel better. DO NOT take cough medicine or cold medicine unless your doctor says it is OK. Coughing helps your body get rid of mucus from your lungs.  Breathing warm, moist (wet) air helps loosen the sticky mucus that may make you feel like you are choking. These things may help: Place a warm, wet washcloth loosely over your nose and mouth. Fill a humidifier with warm water and breathe in the warm mist. Take a couple of deep breaths 2 or 3 times every hour. Deep breaths will help open up your lungs. Tap your chest gently a few times a day while lying with your head lower than your chest. This helps bring up mucus from the lungs so that you can cough it out.  Drink plenty of liquids, as long as your provider says it is OK. Drink water, juice, or weak tea Drink at least 6 to 10 cups (1.5 to 2.5 liters) a day DO NOT drink alcohol  Get plenty of rest when you go home. If you have trouble sleeping at night, take naps during the day. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, most people improve within 2 weeks. Older adults or very sick people may need longer treatment. Those who may be more likely to have complicated pneumonia include: Older adults People whose immune system does not work well People with other, serious medical problems such as diabetes or  cirrhosis of the liver In all of the above conditions, pneumonia can lead to death, if it is severe. In rare cases, more serious problems may develop, including: Life-threatening changes in the lungs that require a breathing machine Fluid around the lung ( pleural effusion ) Infected fluid around the lung ( empyema ) Lung abscesses  Your doctor may order another x-ray. This is to make sure your lungs are clear. But it may take many weeks for your x-ray to clear up. You will likely feel better before the x-ray clears up. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Cough that brings up bloody or rust-colored mucus Breathing (respiratory) symptoms that get worse Chest pain that gets worse when you cough or breathe in Fast or painful breathing Night sweats or unexplained weight loss Shortness of breath, shaking chills, or persistent fevers Signs of pneumonia and a weak immune system (for example, such as with HIV or chemotherapy) Worsening of symptoms after initial improvement Prevention 
 
 You can help prevent pneumonia by following the measures below. Wash your hands often, especially: Before preparing and eating food After blowing your nose After going to the bathroom After changing a baby's diaper After coming in contact with people who are sick  DO NOT smoke. Tobacco damages your lung's ability to fight infection. Vaccines may help prevent some types of pneumonia. Be sure to get the following vaccines: Flu vaccine can help prevent pneumonia caused by the flu virus. Pneumococcal vaccine lowers your chances of getting pneumonia from  Streptococcus pneumoniae .  Vaccines are even more important for older adults and people with diabetes, asthma, emphysema, HIV, cancer, people with organ transplants, or other long-term conditions. Alternative Names 
 
 Bronchopneumonia; Community-acquired pneumonia; CAP Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 Pneumonia 
 White nail syndrome 
 References 
 
 Ellison RT, Donowitz GR. Acute pneumonia. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 69. Musher DM. Overview of pneumonia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 97. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Atypical pneumonia 
 Avian influenza 
 CMV pneumonia 
 Empyema 
 Flu 
 Hospital-acquired pneumonia 
 Legionnaire disease 
 Mycoplasma pneumonia 
 Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia 
 Pneumonia - weakened immune system 
 Viral pneumonia 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bronchiolitis - discharge 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 How to breathe when you are short of breath 
 Oxygen safety 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Pneumonia in children - discharge 
 Using oxygen at home 
 Using oxygen at home - what to ask your doctor  
 When your baby or infant has a fever 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia