
 Pneumonia - weakened immune system 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumonia is a lung infection. It can be caused by many different germs, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi. This article discusses pneumonia that occurs in a person who has a hard time fighting off infection because of problems with the immune system. This type of disease is called "pneumonia in an immunocompromised host." Related conditions include: Hospital-acquired pneumonia Pneumocystis jirovecii (previously called Pneumocystis carinii) pneumonia Pneumonia - cytomegalovirus Pneumonia Viral pneumonia Walking pneumonia Causes 
 
 People whose immune system is not working well are less able to fight off germs. This makes them prone to infections from germs that do not often cause disease in healthy people. They are also more vulnerable to regular causes of  pneumonia , which can affect anyone. Your immune system may be weakened or not work well because of: Bone marrow transplant Chemotherapy HIV infection Leukemia , lymphoma, and other conditions that harm your bone marrow Autoimmune disorders Medicines (including steroids, and those used to treat cancer and control autoimmune diseases) Organ transplant (including kidney, heart, and lung)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Cough (may be dry or produce mucus-like, greenish, or pus-like sputum) Chills with shaking Easy fatigue Fever General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Headache Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Sharp or stabbing  chest pain  that gets worse with deep breathing or coughing Shortness of breath Other symptoms that may occur: Heavy sweating or night sweats Stiff joints (rare) Stiff muscles (rare)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may hear crackles or other abnormal breath sounds when listening to your chest with a stethoscope. Decreased volume of breath sounds is a key sign. This finding may mean there is a buildup of fluid between the chest wall and lung ( pleural effusion ). Tests may include: Arterial blood gases Blood chemistries Blood culture Bronchoscopy  (in certain cases) Chest CT scan  (in certain cases) Chest x-ray Complete blood count Lung biopsy  (in certain cases) Serum  Cryptococcus  antigen test Serum galactomannan test Sputum culture Sputum Gram stain Sputum immunofluorescence tests  (or other immune tests) Urine tests (to diagnose  Legionnaire disease  or Histoplasmosis)  Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics or antifungal medicines may be used, depending on the type of germ that is causing the infection. Antibiotics are not helpful for viral infections. You may need to stay in the hospital during the early stages of the illness. Oxygen and treatments to remove fluid and mucus from the respiratory system are often needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Factors that may lead to a worse outcome include:  The pneumonia that is caused by a fungus. The person has a very weak immune system.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Respiratory failure (the person needs machines to assist breathing) Sepsis Spread of the infection Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a weakened immune system and you have symptoms of pneumonia. Prevention 
 
 If you have a weakened immune system, you may receive daily antibiotics to prevent some types of pneumonia. Ask your provider if you should receive the influenza (flu) and pneumococcal (pneumonia) vaccines. Practice good hygiene. Thoroughly wash your hands with soap and water: After being outdoors After changing a diaper After doing housework After going to the bathroom After touching body fluids, such as mucus or blood After using the telephone Before handling food or eating  Other things you can do to reduce your exposure to germs include: Keep your house clean. Stay away from crowds. Ask visitors who have a cold to wear a mask or not to visit. DO NOT do yard work or handle plants or flowers (they can carry germs).  Alternative Names 
 
 Pneumonia in immunodeficient patient; Pneumonia - immunocompromised host Images 
 
 
 Pneumococci organism 
 Lungs 
 The lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Donnelly JP, Blijlevens NMA, van der Velden WJFM. Infections in the immunocompromised host. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 309. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults.  Clin Infect Dis . 2007 Mar 1;44 Suppl 2:S27-72. PMID: 17278083  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17278083 .  Marr KA. Approach to fever and suspected infection in the compromised host. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 281. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Immune response 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia