
 Poisoning first aid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Poisoning is caused by exposure to a harmful substance. This can be due to swallowing, injecting, breathing in, or other means. Most poisonings occur by accident. Immediate first aid is very important in a poisoning emergency. The first aid you give before getting medical help can save a person's life. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Considerations 
 
 Millions of poisonings are reported to United States poison control centers every year. Many result in death. It is important to note that just because a package does not have a warning label does not mean a substance is safe. You should consider poisoning if someone suddenly becomes sick for no apparent reason. Poisoning should also be considered if the person is found near a furnace, car, fire, or in an area that is not well ventilated. Symptoms of poisoning may take time to develop. However, if you think someone has been poisoned, DO NOT wait for symptoms to develop. Get medical help right away. Causes 
 
 Items that can cause poisoning include:  Carbon monoxide gas (from furnaces, gas engines, fires, space heaters) Certain foods Chemicals in the workplace Drugs, including over-the-counter and prescription medicines (such as an  aspirin overdose ) and illicit drugs such as cocaine Household  detergents  and cleaning products Household and outdoor plants (eating toxic plants) Insecticides Paints  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary according to the poison, but may include:  Abdominal pain Bluish lips Chest pain Confusion Cough Diarrhea Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath Dizziness Double vision Drowsiness Fever Headache Heart palpitations Irritability Loss of appetite Loss of bladder control Muscle twitching Nausea and vomiting Numbness and tingling Seizures Skin rash  or  burns Stupor Unconsciousness Unusual  breath odor Weakness First Aid 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. For poisoning by swallowing: Check and monitor the person's airway, breathing, and pulse. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and  CPR .  Try to make sure that the person has indeed been poisoned. It may be hard to tell. Some signs include chemical-smelling breath, burns around the mouth, difficulty breathing, vomiting, or unusual odors on the person. If possible, identify the poison. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. If the person vomits, clear the person's airway. Wrap a cloth around your fingers before cleaning out the mouth and throat. If the person has been sick from a plant part, save the vomit. It may help experts identify what medicine can be used to help reverse the poisoning. If the person starts having convulsions, give  convulsion first aid . Keep the person comfortable. The person should be rolled onto the left side, and remain there while getting or waiting for medical help. If the poison has spilled on the person's clothes, remove the clothing and flush the skin with water.  For inhalation poisoning: Call for emergency help. Never attempt to rescue a person without notifying others first.  If it is safe to do so, rescue the person from the danger of the gas, fumes, or smoke. Open windows and doors to remove the fumes. Take several deep breaths of fresh air, and then hold your breath as you go in. Hold a wet cloth over your nose and mouth. DO NOT light a match or use a lighter because some gases can catch fire. After rescuing the person from danger, check and monitor the person's airway, breathing, and pulse. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and CPR. If necessary, perform  first aid for eye injuries  or convulsion first aid. If the person vomits, clear the person's airway. Wrap a cloth around your fingers before cleaning out the mouth and throat. Even if the person seems perfectly fine, get medical help.  DO NOT 
 
 DO NOT: Give an unconscious person anything by mouth. Induce vomiting unless you are told to do so by the Poison Control Center or a doctor. A strong poison that burns on the way down the throat will also do damage on the way back up. Try to neutralize the poison with lemon juice or vinegar, or any other substance, unless you are told to do so by the Poison Control Center or a doctor. Use any "cure-all" type antidote. Wait for symptoms to develop if you suspect that someone has been poisoned.  When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. After doing first aid steps at home, you may need to go to the emergency room. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. At the hospital you will have an exam. You also may need the following tests and treatments. Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT (computerized tomography, or advanced imaging) scan EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effects of the poisoning if one exists  Prevention 
 
 Be aware of poisons in and around your home. Take steps to  protect young children  from toxic substances. Store all  medicines , cleaners, cosmetics, and household chemicals out of reach of children, or in cabinets with childproof latches. Be familiar with plants in your home, yard, and vicinity. Keep your children informed, too. Remove any poisonous plants. Never eat wild plants, mushrooms, roots, or berries unless you very familiar with them. Teach children about the dangers of substances that contain poison. Label all poisons. DO NOT store household chemicals in food containers, even if they are labeled. Most nonfood substances are poisonous if taken in large doses. If you are concerned that industrial poisons might be polluting nearby land or water, report your concerns to the local health department or the state or federal Environmental Protection Agency. Images 
 
 
 Check airway 
 References 
 
 Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 147.  Mowry JB, Spyker DA, Cantilena LR Jr, McMillan N, Ford M. 2013 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers' National Poison Data System (NPDS): 31st Annual Report.  Clin Toxicol (Phila) . 2014 Dec;52(10):1032-283. PMID: 25559822  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25559822 .  
 Review Date 1/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, emergency medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 First Aid 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia