
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Polycystic kidney disease is a kidney disorder passed down through families. In this disease, many cysts form in the kidneys, causing them to become enlarged. Causes 
 
 Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is passed down through families (inherited). The 2 inherited forms of PKD are  autosomal dominant  and  autosomal recessive . People with PKD have many clusters of cysts in the kidneys. What exactly triggers the cysts to form is unknown.  PKD is associated with the following conditions: Aortic aneurysms Brain  aneurysms Cysts in the liver, pancreas, and  testes Diverticula  of the colon As many as half of people with PKD have cysts in the liver. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of PKD may include any of the following: Abdominal pain  or tenderness Blood in the urine Excessive urination at night Flank pain  on one or both sides Drowsiness Joint pain Nail abnormalities Exams and Tests 
 
 An examination may show: Abdominal tenderness  over the liver Enlarged liver Heart murmurs  or other signs of  aortic insufficiency  or mitral insufficiency High blood pressure Growths in the kidneys or abdomen Tests that may be done include: Cerebral angiography Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for anemia Liver tests (blood) Urinalysis People with a personal or family history of PKD who have headaches should be tested to determine if cerebral aneurysms are the cause. PKD and  cysts  on the liver or other organs may be found using the following tests: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal MRI  scan Abdominal ultrasound Intravenous pyelogram  (IVP) If several members of your family have PKD, genetic tests can be done to determine whether you carry the PKD gene. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control symptoms and prevent complications. Treatment may include: Blood pressure medicines Diuretics (water pills) Low-salt diet Any urinary tract infection should be treated quickly with antibiotics. Cysts that are painful, infected, bleeding, or causing a blockage may need to be drained. There are usually too many cysts to make it practical to remove each cyst. Surgery to remove 1 or both kidneys may be needed. Treatments for  end-stage kidney disease  may include  dialysis  or a  kidney transplant . Support Groups 
 
 You can often ease the stress of an illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease gets worse slowly. Eventually, it may lead to end-stage  kidney failure . It is also associated with  liver disease , including infection of liver cysts. Treatment may relieve symptoms for many years. People with PKD who don't have other diseases may be good candidates for a kidney transplant. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from PKD include: Anemia Bleeding or rupture of cysts Chronic kidney disease End-stage kidney disease High blood pressure Infection of liver cysts Kidney stones Liver failure (mild to severe) Repeated  urinary tract infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have symptoms of PKD You have a family history of PKD or related disorders and you are planning to have children (you may want to have genetic counseling) Prevention 
 
 Currently, no treatment can prevent the cysts from forming or enlarging. Alternative Names 
 
 Cysts - kidneys; Kidney - polycystic; Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; ADPKD  Images 
 
 
 Kidney and liver cysts - CT scan 
 Liver and spleen cysts - CT scan 
 References 
 
 Arnaout MA. Cystic kidney diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 129. Porter CC, Avner Ed. Anatomic abnormalities associated with hematuria. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 515. Somlo S, Torres VE, Caplan MJ. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. In: Alpern RJ, Moe OW, Caplan MJ, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 80. Torres VE, Grantham JJ. Cystic diseases of the kidney. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 45. Torres VE, Grantham JJ. Cystic diseases of the kidney. In: Brenner BM, ed.  Brenner and Rector's the Kidney . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Anemia 
 Aneurysm 
 Cyst 
 Diverticulitis 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Erythropoietin test 
 Flank pain 
 High blood pressure 
 Kidney stones 
 Liver disease 
 Testes 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Cysts 
 Browse the Encyclopedia