
 Potassium in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Potassium is a mineral that your body needs to work properly. It is a type of  electrolyte . Function 
 
 Potassium is a very important mineral for the human body.  Your body needs potassium to:  Build proteins Break down and use carbohydrates Build muscle Maintain normal body growth Control the electrical activity of the heart Control the acid-base balance  Food Sources 
 
 Many foods contain potassium. All meats (red meat and chicken) and fish such as salmon, cod, flounder, and sardines are good sources of potassium. Soy products and veggie burgers are also good sources of potassium. Vegetables including broccoli, peas, lima beans, tomatoes, potatoes (especially their skins), sweet potatoes, and winter squash are all good sources of potassium. Fruits that contain significant amounts of potassium include citrus fruits, cantaloupe, bananas, kiwi, prunes, and apricots. Dried apricots contain more potassium than fresh apricots. Milk, yogurt, and nuts are also excellent sources of potassium. People with kidney problems, especially those on dialysis, should not eat too many potassium-rich foods. The health care provider will recommend a special diet.  Side Effects 
 
 Having too much or too little potassium in the body can cause serious health problems. A low blood level of potassium is called  hypokalemia . It can cause weak muscles, abnormal heart rhythms, and a slight rise in blood pressure. You may have hypokalemia if you: Take diuretics (water pills) to treat high blood pressure or heart failure Take too many laxatives Have severe or prolonged vomiting and diarrhea Have certain kidney or adrenal gland disorders  Too much potassium in the blood is known as  hyperkalemia . It may cause abnormal and dangerous heart rhythms. Some common causes include: Poor kidney function Heart medicines called angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin 2 receptor blockers (ARBs) Potassium-sparing diuretics (water pills) such as spironolactone or amiloride Severe infection  Recommendations 
 
 The Food and Nutrition Center of the Institute of Medicine recommends these dietary intakes for potassium, based on age: INFANTS 0 to 6 months: 0.4 grams a day (g/day) 7 to 12 months: 0.7 g/day  CHILDREN and ADOLESCENTS 1 to 3 years: 3 g/day 4 to 8 years: 3.8 g/day 9 to 13 years: 4.5 g/day 14 to 18 years: 4.7 g/day  ADULTS Age 19 and older: 4.7 g/day  Women who are producing breast milk need slightly higher amounts (5.1 g/day). Ask your provider what amount is best for you. People who are being treated for hypokalemia need potassium supplements. Your provider will develop a supplementation plan based on your specific needs. Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - potassium; Hyperkalemia - potassium in the diet; Hypokalemia - potassium in the diet; Chronic kidney disease - potassium in diet; Kidney failure - potassium in diet References 
 
 Seifter JL. Potassium disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 117. US Department of Health and Human Services and US Department of Agriculture.  Dietary Guidelines for Americans . 2015-2020. 8th ed. December 2015.  health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines /. Accessed May 4, 2016. Read More 
 
 Amino acids 
 Carbohydrates 
 Electrolytes 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 4/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Potassium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia