
 Preventive health care 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 All adults should visit their health care provider from time to time, even when they are healthy. The purpose of these visits is to: Screen for diseases, such as  high blood pressure  or  diabetes Look for future disease risks, such as high cholesterol and obesity Discuss  alcohol use and safe drinking  and  tips on how to quit smoking Encourage a healthy lifestyle, such as healthy eating and  exercise Update vaccinations Maintain a relationship with your health care provider in case of illness Discuss medications or supplements that you are taking WHY PREVENTIVE HEALTH CARE IS IMPORTANT Even if you feel fine, you should still see your health care provider for regular checkups. These visits can help you avoid problems in the future. For example, the only way to find out if you have high blood pressure is to have it checked regularly. High blood sugar and high cholesterol levels also may not have any symptoms in the early stages. A simple blood test can check for these conditions. Below are some of the tests that may be done or scheduled: Blood pressure Blood sugar Cholesterol (blood) Colon cancer screening  test Depression screening Genetic testing for breast cancer or ovarian cancer in certain women HIV test Mammogram Osteoporosis screening Pap smear Tests for  Chlamydia ,  gonorrhea , syphilis, and other sexually transmitted diseases Your health care provider can recommend  how often you might want to schedule a visit . Another part of preventive health is learning to recognize changes in your body that may not be normal. This is so you can see your health care provider right away. Changes may include: A lump anywhere on your body Losing weight without trying A lasting  fever A cough that does not go away Body aches and pains that do not go away Changes or blood in your stools Skin changes or sores that do not go away or get worse Other changes or symptoms that are new or do not go away WHAT YOU CAN DO TO STAY HEALTHY In addition to seeing your doctor for regular checkups, there are things you can do to stay healthy and help lower your risk for diseases. If you already have a health condition, taking these steps can help you manage it. Don't smoke or use tobacco . Exercise  at least 150 minutes a week (2 hours and 30 minutes). Eat a balanced diet  with plenty of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and low-fat or nonfat dairy. If you  drink alcohol , do so in moderation (no more than 2 drinks a day for men and no more than 1 drink a day for women). Maintain a  healthy weight . Always use seatbelts, and use car seats if you have children. Don't use illegal drugs. Practice  safe sex . Images 
 
 
 Physical activity - preventive medicine 
 References 
 
 Atkins D, Barton M. The periodic health examination. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 14. Guide to Clinical Preventive Services 2014. Recommendations of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.  http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/tools-and-resources-for-better-preventive-care. Accessed March 9, 2015.Guide to Clinical Preventive Services 2014. Recommendations of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/tools-and-resources-for-better-preventive-care. Accessed March 9, 2015. 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Diane M. Horowitz, MD, Rheumatologist, North Shore Long Island Jewish Health System, Great Neck, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia