
 Primary amyloidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Primary amyloidosis is a disorder in which abnormal proteins build up in tissues and organs. Clumps of the abnormal proteins are called amyloid deposits. Causes 
 
 The cause of primary amyloidosis is not well understood. Genes may play a role. The condition is related to abnormal and excess production of proteins. Clumps of abnormal proteins build up in certain organs. This makes it harder for the organs to work correctly.  Primary amyloidosis can lead to conditions that include: Carpal tunnel syndrome Heart muscle damage ( cardiomyopathy ) leading to  congestive heart failure Intestinal  malabsorption Liver swelling Kidney failure Nephrotic syndrome Nerve problems (neuropathy) Orthostatic hypotension (drop in blood pressure when you stand up)  Primary amyloidosis is rare. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the organs affected. This disease can affect the tongue, intestines, skeletal and smooth muscles, nerves, skin, ligaments, heart, liver, spleen, and kidneys. Symptoms may include any of the following: Abnormal heart rhythm Swollen tongue Fatigue Numbness of hands or feet Shortness of breath Skin changes Swallowing problems Swelling in the arms and legs Weak hand grip Weight loss  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Decreased urine output Diarrhea Hoarseness or changing voice Joint pain Weakness  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms. A physical exam may show that you have a  swollen liver  or spleen. The first step in diagnosing amyloidosis should be blood and urine tests to look for abnormal proteins.  Other tests depend on your symptoms and what organ may be affected. Some tests include: Abdominal ultrasound  to check the liver and spleen Heart tests such as an  ECG  or  echocardiogram Kidney function tests to check for signs of kidney failure ( nephrotic syndrome )  Tests that can help confirm the diagnosis include: Abdominal fat pad aspiration Bone marrow biopsy Rectal  mucosa  biopsy  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include:  Chemotherapy Stem cell transplant  If the condition is caused by another disease, that disease should be aggressively treated. This may improve symptoms or slow the disease from getting worse. Complications such as heart failure, kidney failure, and other problems can sometimes be treated, when needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on which organs are affected. Heart and kidney involvement may lead to organ failure and death. Body-wide ( systemic ) amyloidosis can lead to death within 2 years.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of this disease. Also call if you have been diagnosed with this disease and have:  Decreased urine Difficulty breathing Swelling of the ankles or other body parts that does not go away  Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for primary amyloidosis. Alternative Names 
 
 Amyloid - primary Images 
 
 
 Amyloidosis on the fingers 
 Amyloidosis on the face 
 References 
 
 Gertz MA, Buadi FK, Zeldenrust SR, Hayman SR. Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis). In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 87. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome 
 Endocrine glands 
 Malabsorption 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 2/8/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amyloidosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia