
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The bile ducts are tubes that move  bile  from the liver to the small intestine. Bile is a substance that helps with digestion. All of the bile ducts together are called the biliary tract. When the bile ducts become swollen or inflamed, this blocks the flow of bile. The buildup of bile damages the liver cells and leads to scarring of the liver called cirrhosis. This is called biliary cirrhosis. Causes 
 
 The cause of inflamed bile ducts in the liver is not known. However, primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune disorder. That means your body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. The disease may be linked to  autoimmune disorders  such as: Celiac disease Raynaud phenomenon Sicca syndrome (dry eyes or mouth) Thyroid disease  The disease more commonly affects middle-aged women. Symptoms 
 
 More than one half of people have no symptoms at the time of diagnosis. Symptoms most often begin slowly. Early symptoms may include: 
  Nausea and belly pain
   Fatigue and loss of energy Fatty deposits under the skin Fatty stools Itching Poor appetite and weight loss As liver function worsens, symptoms may include: Fluid buildup in the legs (edema) and in the abdomen (ascites) Yellow color in the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes (jaundice) Redness on the palms of the hands In men, impotence, shrinking of the testicles, and breast swelling Easy bruising and abnormal bleeding, most often from swollen veins in the digestive tract Confusion or problems thinking Pale or clay-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. The following tests can check to see if your liver is working properly: 
   Albumin blood test
    Liver function tests  (serum alkaline phosphatase is most important) Prothrombin time ( PT ) Cholesterol and lipoprotein blood tests  Other tests that can help diagnose this disease are: 
   Elevated immunoglobulin M level in the blood
    Liver biopsy Anti-mitochondrial antibodies  (results are positive in about 95% of cases)  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to ease symptoms and prevent complications. Cholestyramine (or colestipol) may reduce the itching. Ursodeoxycholic acid may improve removal of bile from the bloodstream. This may improve survival in some people. Vitamin replacement therapy restores vitamins A, K, E and D, which are lost in fatty stools. A calcium supplement or other bone medicines may be added to prevent or treat  weak or soft bones . Long-term  monitoring and treatment of liver failure  is needed. Liver transplant  may be successful if it is done before liver failure occurs.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome can vary. If the condition is not treated, most people will die without a liver transplant. About one quarter of people who have had the disease for 10 years will have liver failure. Doctors can now use a statistical model to predict the best time to do the transplant. Other diseases, such as hypothyroidism and anemia, can also develop. Possible Complications 
 
 Progressive cirrhosis can lead to liver failure. Complications can include: Bleeding Damage to the brain ( encephalopathy ) Fluid and  electrolyte  imbalance Kidney failure Malabsorption Malnutrition Soft or weak bones (osteomalacia or osteoporosis)  Ascites (fluid buildup in the abdominal cavity) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Abdominal swelling Blood in the stools 
  Confusion
    
   Jaundice
    
   Itching of the skin that does not go away and is not related to other causes
    Vomiting blood Alternative Names 
 
 PBC  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Perman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2012:chap 23. Eaton JE, Lindor KD. Primary biliary chirrhosis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 91. Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and liver. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Bile 
 Cirrhosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Cirrhosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia