
 Primary alveolar hypoventilation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Primary alveolar hypoventilation is a rare disorder in which a person does not take enough breaths per minute. The lungs and airways are normal. Causes 
 
 Normally, when the oxygen level in the blood is low or the carbon dioxide level is high, there is a signal from the brain to breathe more deeply or quickly. In people with primary alveolar hypoventilation, this change in breathing does not happen. The cause of this condition is unknown. Some people have a specific genetic defect. The disease mainly affects men 20 to 50 years old. It may also occur in children. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are usually worse during sleep. Episodes of stopped breathing ( apnea ) often occur while sleeping. Often there is no shortness of breath during the day. Symptoms include: Bluish coloration of the skin  caused by lack of oxygen Daytime drowsiness Fatigue Morning  headaches Swelling of the ankles Waking up from sleep unrested Waking up many times at night  People with this disease are very sensitive to even small doses of sedatives or narcotics. These drugs can make their breathing problem much worse. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms.  Tests will be done to rule out other causes. For example, muscular dystrophy can make the rib muscles weak, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) damages the lung tissue itself. A small stroke can affect the breathing center in the brain. Tests that may be done include: Measuring levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood ( arterial blood gases ) Chest x-ray Hematocrit  and  hemoglobin  blood tests tests to check oxygen carrying ability of red blood cells Lung function tests Overnight oxygen level measurements (oximetry) Carbon dioxide blood test Sleep study ( polysomnography ) Treatment 
 
 Medicines that stimulate the  respiratory  system may be used but do not always work. Mechanical devices that assist breathing, particularly at night, may be helpful in some people. Oxygen therapy may help in a few people, but may worsen night symptoms in others. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Response to treatment varies. Possible Complications 
 
 Low blood oxygen level can cause high blood pressure in the lung blood vessels. This can lead to  cor pulmonale  (right-sided heart failure). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Seek medical care right away if bluish skin ( cyanosis ) occurs. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. You should avoid using sleep medicines or other drugs that can cause drowsiness. Alternative Names 
 
 Ondine's curse; Ventilatory failure; Diminished hypoxic ventilator drive; Diminished hypercapnic ventilator drive Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Cielo C, Marcus CL. Central hypoventilation syndromes.  Sleep Med Clin . 2014;9:105-118. PMID: 24678286  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24678286 . Malhotra A, Powell F. Disorders of ventilatory control. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 86. Weinberger SE, Cockrill BA, Mandel J. Disorders of ventilatory control. In: Weinberger SE, Cockrill BA, Mandel J, eds.  Principles of Pulmonary Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia