
 Proctitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Proctitis is an inflammation of the rectum. It can cause discomfort, bleeding, and the discharge of mucus or pus. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of proctitis. They can be grouped as follows: Autoimmune disease Harmful substances Non-sexually transmitted infection Sexually transmitted disease (STD)  Proctitis caused by STD is common in people who have anal intercourse. STDs that can cause proctitis include  gonorrhea , herpes,  chlamydia , and  lymphogranuloma venereum . Infections that are not sexually transmitted are less common than STD proctitis. One type of proctitis not from an STD is an infection in children that is caused by the same bacteria as strep throat. Autoimmune proctitis is linked to diseases such as  ulcerative colitis  or  Crohn disease . If the inflammation is in the rectum only, it may come and go or move upward into the large intestine. Proctitis may also be caused by some medicines,  radiotherapy  or inserting harmful substances into the rectum. Risk factors include: Autoimmune disorders High-risk sexual practices such as anal sex  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Bloody stools Constipation Rectal bleeding Rectal discharge, pus Rectal pain or discomfort Tenesmus  (pain with bowel movement) Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be used include: Exam of a stool sample Proctoscopy Rectal culture Sigmoidoscopy Treatment 
 
 Most of the time, proctitis will go away when the cause of the problem is treated. Antibiotics are used if an infection is causing the problem.  Corticosteroids or mesalamine suppositories may relieve symptoms for some people. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is good with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include:  Anal fistula Anemia Recto-vaginal  fistula  (women) Severe bleeding  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of proctitis. Prevention 
 
 Safe sex practices may help prevent the spread of the disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Inflammation - rectum; Rectal inflammation Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Rectum 
 References 
 
 Coates WC. Disorders of the anorectum. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 96. Fisher WE. The digestive system. In: Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2015 . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 8. Kellerman RD. The sexually transmitted diseases. In: Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2015 . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Amebiasis 
 Anemia 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Chlamydia 
 Crohn disease 
 Fistula 
 Lymphogranuloma venereum 
 Radiation therapy 
 Strep throat 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia