
 Promethazine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Promethazine is a medicine used to treat nausea and vomiting. Promethazine overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this medicine. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Promethazine Where Found 
 
 Promethazine may be sold under the following brand names: Anergan Fargan Phenergan Promahist Promethegan V-Gan  Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Bladder and kidneys Urinary hesitancy Inability to urinate  Heart and blood vessels Rapid heartbeat Weakness from low blood pressure  Nervous system  Coma Delirium Depression Disorientation Drowsiness Excitation Fever Hallucinations Nervousness Unsteadiness Seizures Tremor (unintentional trembling)  Other  Flushed skin Large (dilated) pupils with vision difficulty Muscle stiffness in face or neck  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the pill container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the person survives the first 24 hours, recovery is likely. People who experience heart rhythm irregularities and seizures are at highest risk for a serious outcome. Few people actually die from promethazine overdose. Alternative Names 
 
 Phenergan overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Velez LI, Seng Y-F. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150.  
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia