
 Propoxyphene overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Propoxyphene is medicine used to relieve pain. Propoxyphene overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this medicine. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) took this drug off the market in December 2010 because of the potential to cause deadly heart disturbances. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Propoxyphene Where Found 
 
 Brand names include: Darvocet Darvon Darvon-N Dolene Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Eyes, ears, nose, and throat: Hearing loss Pinpoint pupils  Heart and blood vessels: Heart rhythm disturbances Low blood pressure Weak pulse  Lungs: Breathing problems Breathing slow, labored,  or shallow No breathing  Muscles: Muscle spasticity Nervous system: Coma Confusion Drowsiness Seizures Skin: Cyanosis  (blue fingernails or lips) Jaundice (turning yellow) Rash  Stomach and intestines: Nausea Spasms of the stomach or intestines ( abdominal cramps ) Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.  This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms, including heart rhythm disturbances and seizures, will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the severity of the overdose and how quickly treatment is received. If the proper narcotic antagonist (drug to counteract the effects of narcotics) can be given, recovery from an  acute  overdose occurs within 24 to 48 hours. However, if there has been prolonged coma and shock (damage to multiple internal organs), a more serious outcome is possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Propoxyphene hydrochloride; Dextropropoxyphene References 
 
 Bardsley CH. Opioids. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 162.  Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. 
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia