
 Prostate brachytherapy  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brachytherapy is a procedure to implant radioactive seeds (pellets) into the prostate gland to kill  prostate cancer  cells. The seeds may give off high or low amounts of radiation. Description 
 
 Brachytherapy takes 30 minutes or more, depending on the type of therapy you have. Before the procedure, you will be given medicine so that you do not feel pain. You may receive: A sedative to make you drowsy and numbing medicine on your perineum. This is the area between the anus and rectum. Anesthesia. With  spinal anesthesia , you will be drowsy but awake, and numb below the waist. With  general anesthesia , you will be asleep and pain-free.  After you receive anesthesia: The doctor places an  ultrasound  probe into your rectum to view the area. The probe is like a camera connected to a video monitor in the room. A  catheter  (tube) may be placed in your bladder to drain urine. The doctor uses ultrasound or a  CT scan  to plan and then place the seeds that deliver radiation into your prostate. The seeds are placed with needles or special applicators through your perineum. Placing the seeds may hurt a little (if you are awake).  Types of brachytherapy: Low-dose rate brachytherapy is the most common type of treatment. The seeds stay inside your prostate and put out a small amount of radiation for several months. You go about your normal routine with the seeds in place. High-dose rate brachytherapy lasts about 30 minutes. Your doctor inserts the radioactive material into the prostate. The doctor may use a computerized robot to do this. The radioactive material is removed right away after treatment. This method often requires two treatments spaced one week apart.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Brachytherapy is often used for men with a small prostate cancer that is found early and is slow-growing. Brachytherapy has fewer complications and side effects than standard radiation therapy. You will also need fewer visits with the doctor. Risks 
 
 Risks of any anesthesia are: Allergic reactions to medicines Breathing problems Risks of any surgery are: Bleeding Infection Risks of this procedure are: Impotence Difficulty emptying your bladder, and the need to use a catheter  Rectal urgency, or the feeling that you need to have a bowel movement right away  Skin irritation in your rectum or bleeding from your rectum Other urinary problems Ulcers (sores) or a fistula (abnormal passage) in the rectum, scarring and narrowing of the urethra (all of these are rare) Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your health care provider what medicines you are taking. These include medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. Before this procedure: You may need to have ultrasounds,  x-rays , or CT scans to prepare for the procedure. Several days before the procedure, you may be told to stop taking medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. These medicines include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil), clopidogrel (Plavix), and warfarin (Coumadin). Ask which medicines you should still take on the day of the surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Your provider can help. On the day of the procedure: You will likely be asked not to drink or eat anything for several hours before the procedure. Take the medicines you've been told to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital. Be sure to arrive on time. After the Procedure 
 
 You may be sleepy and have mild pain and tenderness after the procedure. After an outpatient procedure, you can go home as soon as the anesthesia wears off. In rare cases, you will need to spend 1 to 2 days in the hospital. If you stay in the hospital, your visitors will need to follow special radiation safety precautions. If you have a permanent implant, your provider may tell you to limit the amount of time you spend around children and women who are pregnant. After a few weeks to months, the radiation is gone and will not cause any harm. Because of this, there is no need to take out the seeds. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with small, slow-growing prostate cancer remain cancer-free or their cancer is in good control for many years after this treatment. Urinary and rectal symptoms may last for months or years. Alternative Names 
 
 Implant therapy - prostate cancer; Radioactive seed placement; Internal radiation therapy - prostate; High dose radiation (HDR) References 
 
 D'Amico AV, Crook JM, Beard CJ, DeWeese TL, Hurwitz M, Kaplan ID. Radiation therapy for prostate cancer. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, et al., eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 104. Nelson WG, Carter H, DeWeese TL, Antonarakis ES, Eisenberger MA. Proastate cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 84. Thompson I, Thrasher JB, Aus G. Guideline for the Management of Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer: 2007 Reviewed and Reaffirmed 2011. Available at  https://www.auanet.org/common/pdf/education/clinical-guidance/Prostate-Cancer.pdf. Accessed February 6, 2015.Thompson I, Thrasher JB, Aus G. Guideline for the Management of Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer: 2007 Reviewed and Reaffirmed 2011. Available at https://www.auanet.org/common/pdf/education/clinical-guidance/Prostate-Cancer.pdf. Accessed February 6, 2015. Read More 
 
 Prostate cancer 
 Radical prostatectomy 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Prostate brachytherapy - discharge  
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 11/29/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Prostate Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia