
 Protein in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Proteins are the building blocks of life. Every cell in the human body contains protein. The basic structure of protein is a chain of amino acids. You need protein in your diet to help your body repair cells and make new ones. Protein is also important for growth and development in children, teens, and pregnant women.  Food Sources 
 
 Protein foods are broken down into parts called amino acids during digestion. The human body needs a number of amino acids in large enough amounts to maintain good health.  Amino acids are found in animal sources such as meats, milk, fish, and eggs. They are also found in plant sources such as soy, beans, legumes, nut butters, and some grains (such as wheat germ and quinoa). You do not need to eat animal products to get all the protein you need in your diet. Amino acids are classified into three groups: Essential Nonessential Conditional  Essential amino acids  cannot be made by the body, and must be supplied by food. They do not need to be eaten at one meal. The balance over the whole day is more important. Nonessential amino acids  are made by the body from essential amino acids or in the normal breakdown of proteins. Conditional amino acids  are needed in times of illness and stress. Recommendations 
 
 The amount of protein you need in your diet will depend on your overall calorie needs. The daily recommended intake of protein for healthy adults is 10% to 35% of your total calorie needs. For example, a person on a 2000 calorie diet could eat 100 grams of protein, which would supply 20% of their total daily calories.  One ounce (30 grams) of most protein-rich foods contains 7 grams of protein. An ounce (30 grams) equals: 1 oz (30 g) of meat fish or poultry 1 large egg ¼ cup (60 milliliters) tofu ½ cup (65 grams) cooked beans or lentils 1 Tbsp (14 grams) peanut butter  Low fat dairy is also a good source of protein. Whole grains contain more protein than refined or "white" products Children and teens  may need different amounts, depending on their age. Some healthy sources of meat protein include:  Turkey or chicken with the skin removed, or bison (also called buffalo meat) Lean cuts of beef or pork, such as round, top sirloin, or tenderloin (trim away any visible fat) Fish or shellfish  Other good sources of protein include: Pinto beans, black beans, kidney beans, lentils, split peas, or garbanzo beans Nuts and seeds, including almonds, hazelnuts, mixed nuts, peanuts, peanut butter, sunflower seeds, or walnuts (just watch how much you eat, because nuts are high in fat) Tofu, tempeh, and other soy protein products Low-fat dairy products  The U.S. Department of Agriculture's newest food guide, called  MyPlate , can help you make healthy eating choices.  Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - protein; Complete protein; Incomplete protein Images 
 
 
 Proteins 
 References 
 
 National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board.  Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids . National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 2005. US Department of Health and Human Services and US Department of Agriculture.  2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.  8th Edition. December 2015.  health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ . Accessed January 15, 2016. 
 Read More 
 
 Amino acids 
 Bile 
 Lipoprotein-a 
 
 Review Date 4/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 01/15/16.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dietary Proteins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia