
 Protein electrophoresis - serum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This lab test measures the types of protein in the fluid (serum) part of a blood sample. This fluid is called serum. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. In the lab, the technician places the blood sample on special paper and applies an electric current. The proteins move on the paper and form bands that show the amount of each protein. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat or drink for 12 hours before this test. Certain medicines may affect the results of this test. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines. DO NOT stop any medicine before talking to your provider. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Proteins are made from  amino acids  and are important parts of all cells and tissues. There are many different kinds of proteins in the body, and they have many different functions. Examples of proteins include enzymes, certain hormones,  hemoglobin , low-density lipoprotein (LDL, or bad cholesterol), and others. Serum proteins are classified as albumin or globulins. Albumin is the most highly concentrated protein in the serum. It carries many small molecules. It is also important for keeping fluid from leaking out from the blood vessels into the tissues. Globulins are divided into alpha-1, alpha-2, beta, and gamma globulins. In general, alpha and gamma globulin protein levels increase when there is inflammation in the body. Lipoprotein electrophoresis determines the amount of proteins made up of protein and fat, called lipoproteins (such as LDL cholesterol). Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges are: Total protein: 6.4 to 8.3 grams per deciliter (g/dL) or 64 to 83 grams per liter (g/L) Albumin: 3.5 to 5.0 g/dL or 35 to 50 g/L Alpha-1 globulin: 0.1 to 0.3 g/dL or 1 to 3 g/L Alpha-2 globulin: 0.6 to 1.0 g/dL or 6 to 10 g/L Beta globulin: 0.7 to 1.2 g/dL or 7 to 12 g/L Gamma globulin: 0.7 to 1.6 g/dL or 7 to 16 g/L The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased total protein may indicate: Abnormal loss of protein from the digestive tract or the inability of the digestive tract to absorb proteins ( protein-losing enteropathy ) Malnutrition Kidney disorder called  nephrotic syndrome Scarring of the liver and poor liver function ( cirrhosis )  Increased alpha-1 globulin proteins may be due to: Acute inflammatory disease Cancer Chronic inflammatory disease (for example,  rheumatoid arthritis ,  SLE )  Decreased alpha-1 globulin proteins may be a sign of: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency Increased alpha-2 globulin proteins may indicate a: Acute inflammation Chronic inflammation  Decreased alpha-2 globulin proteins may indicate: Breakdown of red blood cells ( hemolysis )  Increased beta globulin proteins may indicate: A disorder in which the body has problems breaking down fats (for example, hyperlipoproteinemia,  familial hypercholesterolemia ) Estrogen therapy  Decreased beta globulin proteins may indicate: Abnormally low level of LDL  cholesterol Malnutrition  Increased gamma globulin proteins may indicate: Bone marrow cancer called multiple myeloma Chronic inflammatory disease (for example,  rheumatoid arthritis ) Overactive immune system ( hyperimmunization ) Acute infection White blood cell cancer called  Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia Chronic  liver disease Risks 
 
 There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Lipoprotein electrophoresis Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Protein electrophoresis - serum. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap P. Warner EA, Herold AH. Interpreting laboratory tests. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Alpha-1 antitrypsin blood test 
 Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency 
 Amino acids 
 Antibody 
 Ceruloplasmin blood test 
 Chronic 
 Congenital platelet function defects 
 Factor VIII assay 
 Familial hypercholesterolemia 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Free T4 test 
 Haptoglobin blood test 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hemolysis 
 Hyperimmunization 
 Immunoelectrophoresis - blood 
 Immunofixation blood test 
 Liver disease 
 Malignancy 
 Malnutrition 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Serum globulin electrophoresis 
 Serum iron test 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 T3RU test 
 T3 test 
 Total protein 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Cancer 
 Cirrhosis 
 Kidney Tests 
 Liver Diseases 
 Lupus 
 Malnutrition 
 Multiple Myeloma 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia