
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis is a disease that occurs when the kidneys don't properly remove acids from the blood into the urine. As a result, too much acid remains in the blood (called  acidosis ). Causes 
 
 When the body performs its normal functions, it produces acid. If this acid is not removed or neutralized, the blood will become too acidic. This can lead to  electrolyte  imbalances in the blood. It can also cause problems with normal function of some cells. The kidneys help control the body's acid level by removing acid from the blood and excreting it into the urine. Acidic substances in the body are neutralized by alkaline substances, mainly bicarbonate. Proximal renal tubular acidosis (Type II RTA) occurs when bicarbonate is not properly reabsorbed by the kidney's filtering system. Type II RTA is less common than Type I RTA. Type I is also called  distal renal tubular acidosis . Type II most often occurs during infancy and may go away by itself. Causes of type II RTA include: Cystinosis (body is unable to break down the substance cysteine) Drugs such as ifosfamide (a chemotherapy drug), certain antibiotics that are no longer used much (tetracycline), or acetazolamide Fanconi syndrome , a disorder of the kidney tubes in which certain substances normally absorbed into the bloodstream by the kidneys are released into the urine instead Inherited fructose intolerance , a disorder in which there is a lack of the protein needed to break down the fruit sugar fructose Multiple myeloma , a type of blood cancer Primary hyperparathyroidism , a disorder in which the parathyroid glands in the neck produce too much parathyroid hormone Sjögren syndrome , an autoimmune disorder in which the glands that produce tears and saliva are destroyed Wilson disease , an inherited disorder in which there is too much copper in the body's tissues Vitamin D deficiency Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of proximal renal tubular acidosis include any of the following:  Confusion  or  decreased alertness Dehydration Fatigue Increased breathing rate Osteomalacia  (softening of the bones) Muscle pain Weakness Other symptoms can include: Decreased urine output Increased  heart rate  or  irregular heartbeat Muscle cramps Pain in the bones, back, flank, or abdomen Skeletal deformities Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Arterial  blood gas Blood chemistry Blood pH level Urine pH  and  acid-loading test Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 The goal is to restore normal acid level and electrolyte balance in the body. This will help correct bone disorders and reduce the risk of osteomalacia and osteopenia in adults. Some adults may need no treatment. All children need alkaline medicine such as potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate. This is medicine that helps correct the acidic condition of the body. The medicine helps prevent bone disease caused by too much acid, such as rickets, and to allow normal growth.  The underlying cause of proximal renal tubular necrosis should be corrected if it can be found. Vitamin D  and calcium supplements may be needed to help reduce skeletal deformities resulting from osteomalacia. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Although the underlying cause of proximal renal tubular acidosis may go away by itself, the effects and complications can be permanent or life threatening. Treatment is usually successful. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of proximal renal tubular acidosis. Get medical help right away if any of the following emergency symptoms develop: Decreased alertness or  disorientation Decreased consciousness Seizures Prevention 
 
 Most of the disorders that cause proximal renal tubular acidosis are not preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Renal tubular acidosis - proximal; Type II RTA; RTA - proximal; Renal tubular acidosis type II Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 Krapf R, Seldin DW, Alpern RJ. Clinical syndromes of metabolic acidosis. In: Alpern RJ, Caplan M, Moe OW, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 59. Sreedharan R, Avner ED. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 529. Read More 
 
 Distal renal tubular acidosis 
 Fanconi syndrome 
 Low potassium level 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Osteomalacia 
 Respiratory acidosis 
 Rickets 
 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Walead Latif DO, nephrologist, Medical Director of Fresenius Vascular Care, and Clinical Assistant Professor of Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia