
 Prune belly syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Prune belly syndrome is a group of birth defects that involves these 3 main problems: Poor development of the abdominal muscles, causing the skin of the belly area to wrinkle like a prune Undescended testicles Urinary tract problems Causes 
 
 The causes of prune belly syndrome are unknown. The condition affects mostly boys. While in the womb, the developing baby's abdomen swells with fluid. Often, the cause is a problem in the urinary tract. The fluid disappears after birth, leading to a wrinkled abdomen that looks like a prune. This appearance is more noticeable due to the lack of abdominal muscles. Symptoms 
 
 Weak abdominal muscles can cause: "Little Buddha" appearance Constipation Delay in sitting and walking Difficulties coughing Urinary tract problems can cause difficulty urinating. Exams and Tests 
 
 A woman who is pregnant with a baby who has prune belly syndrome may not have enough amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds the fetus). This can cause the infant to have lung problems from being compressed in the womb. An  ultrasound done during pregnancy  may show that the baby has a swollen bladder or enlarged kidney. In some cases, a pregnancy ultrasound may also help determine if the baby has: Heart problems Abnormal bones or muscles Stomach and intestinal problems Underdeveloped lungs  The following tests may be performed on the baby after birth to diagnose the condition: Blood tests Intravenous pyelogram  (IVP) Ultrasound Voiding cystourethrogram  (VCUG) X-ray  Treatment 
 
 Early surgery is recommended to fix weak abdominal muscles, urinary tract problems, and undescended testicles. The baby may be given antibiotics to treat or help prevent urinary tract infections. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prune belly syndrome is a serious and often life-threatening problem. Many infants with prune belly syndrome are either  stillborn  or die within the first few weeks of life. The cause of death is from severe lung or kidney problems, or from a combination of birth problems. Some newborns survive and can develop normally. Others continue to have many medical and developmental problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the related problems. The most common are: Constipation Bone deformities ( clubfoot , dislocated hip, missing limb, finger, or toe,  funnel chest ) Disease of the urinary tract (may need dialysis and a kidney transplant) Undescended testicles can lead to  infertility  or cancer. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Prune belly syndrome is usually diagnosed before birth or when the baby is born. If you have a child with diagnosed prune belly syndrome, call your health care provider at the first sign of a urinary tract infection or other urinary symptoms. If a pregnancy ultrasound shows that your baby has a swollen bladder or enlarged kidneys, talk to a specialist in high-risk pregnancy or perinatology. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent this condition. If the baby is diagnosed with a urinary tract obstruction before birth, in rare cases, surgery during the pregnancy may help prevent the problem from progressing to prune belly syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Eagle-Barrett syndrome; Triad syndrome; Urethral obstruction malformation sequence References 
 
 

Caldamone AA, Woodard JR. Prune belly syndrome. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 123. Elder JS. Obstruction of the urinary tract. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 540. Read More 
 
 Amniotic fluid 
 Potter syndrome 
 Undescended testicle 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia