
 Pseudotumor cerebri 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pseudotumor cerebri is a condition in which the pressure inside the skull is increased. The brain is affected in a way that the condition appears to be, but is not, a tumor. Causes 
 
 The condition occurs more often in women than men, especially in young obese women 20 to 40 years old. It is rare in infants, but can occur in children. The cause is unknown. Certain medicines can increase the risk of this condition. These medicines include: Birth control pills Cyclosporine Isotretinoin Minocycline Nalidixic acid Nitrofurantoin Phenytoin Steroids (starting or stopping them) Sulfa drugs Tamoxifen Tetracycline Vitamin A  The following factors are also related to this condition: Addison disease Chronic kidney failure Cushing disease Hypoparathyroidism Iron deficiency anemia Obesity Onset of menstruation Pregnancy  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Headache Blurred vision Buzzing sound in the ears (tinnitus) Dizziness Double vision  (diplopia) Nausea Vision loss  Symptoms may get worse during physical activity, especially when you tighten the stomach muscles. Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. Signs of this condition include: Bulging anterior fontanelle  in infants Increased head size Swelling of the optic nerve in the back of the eye (papilledema)  Even though there is increased pressure in the skull, there is no change in alertness. Tests that may be done include: CT scan of the head Eye exam, including  visual field  testing MRI of the head  with MR venography Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap)  Diagnosis is made when other health conditions are ruled out. These include conditions that may cause increased pressure in the skull, such as: Hydrocephalus Tumor Venous sinus thrombosis  Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the cause of the pseudotumor. A  lumbar puncture  can help relieve pressure in the brain and prevent vision problems. Other treatments may include: Fluid or salt restriction Medicines such as corticosteroids, acetazolamide, and furosemide Shunting procedures to relieve pressure from spinal fluid buildup Surgery to relieve pressure on the optic nerve Weight loss  People will need to have their vision closely monitored. There can be vision loss, which is sometimes permanent. Follow-up MRI or CT scans may be done to rule out hidden cancer. Outlook (prognosis) 
 
 Sometimes the condition disappears on its own within 6 months. Symptoms can return in some people. A small number of people have symptoms that slowly get worse and lead to blindness. Possible Complications 
 
 Vision loss is a serious complication of this condition. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child has any of the symptoms listed above. Alternative Names 
 
 Idiopathic intracranial hypertension; Benign intracranial hypertension Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension. In: Ferri FF.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:640-641. Pless ML. Pseudotumor cerebri. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 597. Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia