
 Psittacosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Psittacosis is an infection caused by  Chlamydophila psittaci,  a type of bacteria found in the droppings of birds. Birds spread the infection to humans. Causes 
 
 Psittacosis infection develops when you breathe in (inhale) the bacteria. People between 30 to 60 years are commonly affected. People at high risk for this disease include: Bird owners Pet shop employees People who work in poultry processing plants Veterinarians Typical birds involved are parrots, parakeets, and budgerigars, although other birds have also caused the disease. Psittacosis is a rare disease. Very few cases are reported each year in the United States. Symptoms 
 
 The incubation period of psittacosis is of 5 to 15 days. The incubation period is the time it takes for symptoms to appear after being exposed to the bacteria. Symptoms may include: Blood-tinged sputum Dry  cough Fatigue Fever  and chills Headache Joint aches Muscle aches  (most often in the head and neck) Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will hear abnormal lung sounds such as crackles and decreased breath sounds when listening to the chest with a stethoscope. Tests that may be done include: Antibody titer  (rising titer over time is a sign of infection) Blood culture Sputum culture X-ray of the chest Complete blood count Treatment 
 
 The infection is treated with antibiotics. Doxycycline is used first. Other antibiotics that may be given include: Macrolides Fluoroquinolones Other tetracycline antibiotics Note: Tetracycline and doxycycline by mouth are usually not given to children until after all their permanent teeth have started to grow in, because they can permanently discolor teeth that are still forming. These medicines are also not given to pregnant women. Other antibiotics are used in these situations. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A full recovery is expected if you do not have any other conditions that affect your health. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of psittacosis may include: Brain involvement Decreased lung function as a result of the pneumonia Heart valve infection Inflammation of the liver ( hepatitis ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Antibiotics are needed to treat this infection. If you develop symptoms of psittacosis, call your provider. Prevention 
 
 Avoid exposure to birds that may carry these bacteria, such as parrots. Medical problems that lead to a weak immune system increase your risk for this disease and should be treated appropriately. Alternative Names 
 
 Ornithosis; Parrot pneumonia Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Geisler WM. Diseases caused by Chlamydiae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 318. Schlossberg D. Psittacosis (due to Chlamydia psittaci). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 183. Read More 
 
 Hepatitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia