
 Psoriasis - guttate 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Guttate psoriasis is a skin condition in which small, red, scaly teardrop-shaped spots with a silvery scale appear on the arms, legs, and middle of the body. Guttate means "drop" in Latin. Causes 
 
 Guttate psoriasis is a type of  psoriasis . It is usually seen in persons younger than 30. The condition often develops suddenly. It usually appears after an infection, most notably  strep throat  caused by group A strep. Guttate psoriasis is not contagious. This means it cannot spread to other people. Psoriasis seems to be passed down through families. Doctors think it probably occurs when the body's immune system mistakes healthy cells for harmful substances.
 In addition to strep throat, the following may trigger an attack of guttate psoriasis: Bacteria or viral infections, including upper respiratory infections Injury to the skin, including cuts,  burns,  and  insect bites Some medicines, including those used to treat malaria and certain heart conditions Stress Sunburn Too much alcohol Psoriasis may be severe in persons who have a weakened immune system. This may include persons who have:  
 HIV/ AIDS Autoimmune disorders , including  rheumatoid arthritis Chemotherapy for cancer Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Itching Spots on the skin that are pinkish-red and look like teardrops Spots may be covered with silver, flaky skin called scales Spots usually occur on the arms, legs, and middle of the body (the trunk), but may appear in other body areas Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will look at your skin. Diagnosis is usually based on what the spots look like. Often, a person with this type of psoriasis has recently had a sore throat or upper respiratory infection. Tests to confirm the diagnosis may include: Skin biopsy Throat culture Treatment 
 
 Goal of treatment is to control your symptoms and prevent  secondary infections . If you have a current or recent infection, your doctor may give you antibiotics. Mild cases of guttate psoriasis are usually treated at home. Your doctor may recommend any of the following: Cortisone (anti-itch and anti-inflammatory) cream Dandruff  shampoos (over-the-counter or prescription) Lotions that contain coal tar Moisturizers Prescription medicines that have vitamin D to apply to the skin (topically) or that have vitamin A (retinoids) to take by mouth (orally) People with very severe guttate psoriasis may receive medicines to suppress the body's immune response. These medicines include cyclosporine and methotrexate. A newer group of medicines called biologics that alter parts of the immune system may also be used. Your doctor may suggest phototherapy. This is a medical procedure in which your skin is carefully exposed to ultraviolet light. Phototherapy may be given alone or after you take a medicine that makes the skin sensitive to light. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Guttate psoriasis may clear completely following treatment. Sometimes, it may become a chronic (lifelong) condition, or worsen to the more common plaque-type psoriasis. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, this condition may result in: Pain Secondary skin infections Severe itching When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of guttate psoriasis. Images 
 
 
 Psoriasis, guttate on the arms and chest 
 Psoriasis, guttate on the cheek 
 References 
 
 Lebwohl MG, van de Kerkhof CM. Psoriasis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 203. Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Burns 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Immune response 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Psoriasis 
 Rashes 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Scales 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Psoriasis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia