
 Psychosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Psychosis occurs when a person loses contact with reality. The person may:  Have false beliefs about what is taking place, or who one is (delusions) See or hear things that are not there (hallucinations) Causes 
 
 Medical problems that can cause psychosis include: Alcohol  and certain illegal drugs, both during use and during withdrawal Brain diseases, such as  Parkinson disease ,  Huntington disease Brain tumors or cysts Dementia  (including  Alzheimer disease ) HIV and other infections that affect the brain Some prescription drugs, such as steroids and stimulants Some types of  epilepsy Stroke Psychosis may also be found in: Most people with  schizophrenia Some people with  bipolar disorder  (manic-depressive) or severe depression Some personality disorders Symptoms 
 
 A person with psychosis may have any of the following: Disorganized thought and speech False beliefs that are not based in reality (delusions), especially unfounded fear or suspicion Hearing, seeing, or feeling things that are not there ( hallucinations ) Thoughts that "jump" between unrelated topics (disordered thinking)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Psychiatric evaluation and testing are used to diagnose the cause of the psychosis. Laboratory testing and brain scans may not be needed, but sometimes can help pinpoint the diagnosis. Tests may include: Blood tests for abnormal  electrolyte  and hormone levels Blood tests for syphilis  and other infections Drug screens MRI  of the brain Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the psychosis. Care in a hospital is often needed to ensure the person's safety. Antipsychotic drugs, which reduce hallucinations and delusions and improve thinking and behavior, are helpful. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the cause of the psychosis. If the cause can be corrected, the outlook is often good. In this case, treatment with antipsychotic medicine may be brief. Some chronic conditions, such as  schizophrenia , may need lifelong treatment with antipsychotic drugs to control symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Psychosis can prevent people from functioning normally and caring for themselves. Left untreated, people can sometimes harm themselves or others. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or mental health professional if you or a member of your family is losing contact with reality. If there is any concern about safety, take the person to the emergency room to be seen by a doctor. Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the cause. For example, avoiding alcohol prevents psychosis caused by alcohol use. References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.  5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Freudenriech O, Brown HE, Holt DJ. Psychosis and schizophrenia. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 28.
 Read More 
 
 Dementia 
 Schizophrenia 
 
 Review Date 2/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Timothy Rogge, MD, Medical Director, Family Medical Psychiatry Center, Kirkland, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Psychotic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia