
 Pulmonary embolus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pulmonary embolus is a blockage of an artery in the lungs. The most common cause of the blockage is a  blood clot . Causes 
 
 A pulmonary embolus is most often caused by a blood clot that develops in a vein outside the lungs. The most common blood clot is one in a deep vein of the thigh or in the pelvis (hip area). This type of clot is called a  deep vein thrombosis (DVT) . The blood clot breaks off and travels to the lungs where it lodges. Less common causes include air bubbles, fat droplets, amniotic fluid, or clumps of parasites or tumor cells.  You are more likely to get this condition if you or your family has a history of blood clots or certain clotting disorders. A pulmonary embolus may occur: After childbirth After heart attack, heart surgery, or stroke After severe injuries, burns, or fractures of the hips or thigh bone After surgery, most commonly bone, joint, or brain surgery During or after a long plane or car ride If you have cancer If you take birth control pills or estrogen therapy Long-term bed rest or staying in one position for a long time Disorders that may lead to blood clots include: Diseases of the immune system that make it  harder for the blood to clot . Inherited disorders that make the blood more likely to clot. One such disorder is  antithrombin III deficiency . Symptoms 
 
 Main symptoms of a pulmonary embolism include chest pain that may be any of the following: Under the breastbone or on one side Sharp or stabbing Burning, aching, or a dull, heavy sensation Often gets worse with deep breathing You may bend over or hold your chest in response to the pain Other symptoms may include: Bluish skin (cyanosis) Dizziness, lightheadedness, or fainting Fast breathing or wheezing Fast heart rate Feeling anxious Leg pain, redness, or swelling Low blood pressure Sudden cough, possibly coughing up blood or bloody mucus Shortness of breath that starts suddenly Sweating, clammy skin Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history. The following lab tests may be done to see how well your lungs are working: Arterial  blood gases Pulse oximetry  The following imaging tests can help determine where the blood clot is located: Chest x-ray CT angiogram of the chest Pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scan, also called a V/Q scan Pulmonary angiogram Other tests that may be done include: Chest CT scan D-dimer blood test Doppler ultrasound exam of the legs Echocardiogram  (ECG) Blood tests may be done to check if you have an increased chance of blood clotting, including: Antiphospholipid antibodies Genetic testing to look for changes that make you more likely to develop blood clots Lupus anticoagulant Protein C and protein S levels Treatment 
 
 A pulmonary embolus requires treatment right away. You may need to stay in the hospital: You will receive medicines to thin the blood and make it less likely your blood will form more clots. In cases of severe, life-threatening pulmonary embolism, treatment may involve dissolving the clot. This is called thrombolytic therapy. You will receive medicines to dissolve the clot.  Whether or not you need to stay in the hospital, you will likely need to take medicines at home to thin the blood:  You may be given  pills to take  or you may need to give yourself injections. For some medicines, you will need blood tests to monitor your dosage. How long you need to take these medicines depends mostly on the cause and size of your blood clot. Your provider will talk to you about the risk of bleeding problems when you take these medicines. If you cannot take blood thinners, your doctor may suggest surgery to place a device called an inferior vena cava filter (IVC filter). This device is placed in the main vein in your belly. It keeps large clots from traveling into the blood vessels of the lungs. Sometimes, a temporary filter can be placed and removed later. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person recovers from a pulmonary embolus can be hard to predict. It often depends on:  What caused the problem in the first place (for example, cancer, major surgery, or an injury) The size of the blood clot in the lungs If the blood clot dissolves over time Some people can develop long-term heart and lung problems. Death is possible in people with a severe pulmonary embolism. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911), if you have symptoms of pulmonary embolus. Prevention 
 
 Blood thinners may be prescribed to help prevent DVT in people at high risk, or those who are undergoing high-risk surgery. If you had a DVT, your provider will prescribe pressure stockings. Wear them as instructed. They will improve blood flow in your legs and reduce your risk of blood clots. Moving your legs often during long plane trips, car trips, and other situations in which you are sitting or lying down for long periods can also help prevent DVT. People at very high risk for blood clots may need shots of a blood thinner called heparin when they take a flight that lasts longer than 4 hours. Do not smoke. If you smoke, quit. Women who are taking estrogen must stop smoking. Smoking increases your risk of developing blood clots. Alternative Names 
 
 Venous thromboembolism; Lung blood clot; Blood clot - lung; Embolus; Tumor embolus; Embolism - pulmonary; DVT-pulmonary embolism; Thrombosis - pulmonary embolism Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 References 
 
 Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, et al. Executive summary: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines.  Chest . 2012;141(2suppl):7s-47s. PMID: 22315257  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22315257 . Kline JA. Pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 88. Weitz JI. Pulmonary embolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 98. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Cancer 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Heart attack 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Deep vein thrombosis - discharge 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) - what to ask your doctor 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin) 
 Review Date 12/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pulmonary Embolism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia