
 Pulmonary actinomycosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary actinomycosis is a rare lung infection caused by bacteria. Causes 
 
 Pulmonary actinomycosis is caused by certain bacteria normally found in the mouth and gastrointestinal tract. The bacteria often do not cause harm. But poor  dental hygiene  and  tooth abscess  can increase your risk for lung infections caused by these bacteria. People with the following health problems also have a higher chance of developing the infection: Alcohol use Scars on the lungs ( bronchiectasis ) COPD The disease is rare in the United States. It may occur at any age, but is most common in people 30 to 60 years old. Men get this infection more often than women. Symptoms 
 
 The infection often comes on slowly. It may be weeks or months before diagnosis is confirmed. Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest pain  when taking a deep breath Cough  with phlegm (sputum)  Fever Lethargy Night sweats Shortness of breath Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam, and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Bronchoscopy  with culture Complete blood count  (CBC) Chest x-ray Chest CT scan Lung biopsy Modified  AFB smear of sputum Sputum culture 
   Tissue and  sputum Gram stain Thoracentesis  with culture Tissue culture Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection. It may take a long time to get better. To be cured, you may need to receive the antibiotic penicillin through a vein (intravenously) for 4 to 6 weeks. Then you need to take penicillin by mouth for a long period. Some people need up to 18 months of antibiotic treatment. If you cannot take penicillin, your provider will prescribe other antibiotics. Surgery may be needed to drain fluid from the lungs and control the infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people get better after treatment with antibiotics. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain abscess Destruction of parts of the lungs Emphysema Meningitis Osteomyelitis  (bone infection) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of pulmonary actinomycosis Your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment You develop new symptoms You have a fever of 101°F (38.3°C) or higher. Prevention 
 
 Good  dental hygiene  may help reduce your risk for actinomycosis. Alternative Names 
 
 Actinomycosis - pulmonary; Actinomycosis - thoracic Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Brook I. Actinomycosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 329. Russo TA. Agents of actinomycosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 256. Torres A, Menendez R, Wunderink RG. Bacterial pneumonia and lung abscess. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Brain abscess 
 Dental care - adult 
 Empyema 
 Meningitis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Pleural effusion 
 Tooth abscess 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia