
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary hypertension is high blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs. It makes the right side of the heart work harder than normal. Causes 
 
 The right side of the heart pumps blood through the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. Blood returns to the left side of the heart, where it is pumped to the rest of the body. When the small arteries (blood vessels) of the lungs become narrowed, they cannot carry as much blood. When this happens, pressure builds up. This is called pulmonary hypertension. The heart needs to work harder to force the blood through the vessels against this pressure. Over time, this causes the right side of the heart to become larger. This condition is called right-sided heart failure, or cor pulmonale. Pulmonary hypertension may be caused by: Autoimmune diseases  that damage the lungs, such as  scleroderma  and  rheumatoid arthritis Birth defects of the heart Blood clots in the lung ( pulmonary embolism ) Heart failure Heart valve disease HIV infection Low oxygen levels in the blood for a long time (chronic) Lung disease, such as  COPD  or  pulmonary fibrosis Medicines (for example, certain diet drugs) Obstructive sleep apnea In rare cases, the cause of pulmonary hypertension is unknown. In this case, the condition is called idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH). Idiopathic means the cause of a disease is not known. IPAH affects more women than men. If pulmonary hypertension is caused by a known medicine or medical condition, it is called secondary pulmonary hypertension. Symptoms 
 
 Shortness of breath or lightheadedness during activity is often the first symptom. Fast heart rate ( palpitations ) may be present. Over time, symptoms occur with lighter activity or even while at rest. Other symptoms include: Ankle and leg swelling Bluish color of the lips or skin ( cyanosis ) Chest pain  or pressure, usually in the front of the chest Dizziness  or  fainting  spells Fatigue Increased abdomen size Weakness People with pulmonary hypertension often have symptoms that come and go. They report good days and bad days. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. The exam may find: Abnormal heart sounds Feeling of a pulse over the breastbone Heart murmur  on the right side of the heart Larger-than-normal veins in the neck Leg swelling Liver and spleen swelling Normal breath sounds  In the early stages of the disease, the exam may be normal or almost normal. The condition may take several months to diagnose. Asthma and other diseases may cause similar symptoms and must be ruled out. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood tests Cardiac catheterization Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Echocardiogram ECG Lung function tests Nuclear  lung scan Pulmonary arteriogram 6-minute walk test Sleep study Tests to check for autoimmune problems  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for pulmonary hypertension. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms and prevent more lung damage. It is important to treat medical disorders that cause pulmonary hypertension, such as obstructive sleep apnea, lung conditions, and heart valve problems. Many treatment options for pulmonary arterial hypertension are available. If you are prescribed medicines, they may be taken by mouth (oral), received through the vein (intravenous, or IV), or breathed in (inhaled). Your provider will decide which medicine is best for you. You will be closely monitored during treatment to watch for side effects and to see how well you are responding to the medicine. DO NOT stop taking your medicines without talking to your provider. Other treatments may include: Blood thinners to reduce the risk of blood clots, especially if you have IPAH Oxygen therapy at home Heart-lung transplant, if medicines do not work  Other important tips to follow: Avoid pregnancy Avoid heavy physical activities and lifting Avoid traveling to high altitudes Get a yearly flu vaccine, as well as other vaccines such as the pneumonia vaccine Stop smoking  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on what caused the condition. Medicines for IPAH may help slow the disease. As the illness gets worse, you will need to  make changes in your home  to help you get around the house. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You begin to develop shortness of breath when you are active Shortness of breath gets worse You develop chest pain You develop other symptoms  Alternative Names 
 
 Pulmonary arterial hypertension; Sporadic primary pulmonary hypertension; Familial primary pulmonary hypertension; Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension; Primary pulmonary hypertension; PPH; Secondary pulmonary hypertension; Cor pulmonale - pulmonary hypertension Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 Primary pulmonary hypertension 
 Heart-lung transplant  - series 
 References 
 
 Chin K, Channick RN. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 52. McLaughlin V. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 68. Taichman DB, Ornelas J, Chung L, et al. Pharmacologic therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension in adults: CHEST guideline and expert panel report.  Chest . 2014;146:449-475. PMID: 24937180  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24937180 . Read More 
 
 Heart failure - overview 
 
 Review Date 1/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by  David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pulmonary Hypertension 
 Browse the Encyclopedia