
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is a contagious bacterial infection that involves the lungs. It may spread to other organs. Causes 
 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is caused by the bacterium  Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis) . TB is contagious. This means the bacteria is easily spread from an infected person to someone else. You can get TB by breathing in air droplets from a cough or sneeze of an infected person. The resulting lung infection is called primary TB. Most people recover from primary TB infection without further evidence of the disease. The infection may stay inactive (dormant) for years. In some people, it becomes active again (reactivates). Most people who develop symptoms of a TB infection first became infected in the past. In some cases, the disease becomes active within weeks after the primary infection. The following people are at high risk of active TB or reactivation of TB: Elderly Infants People with weakened immune systems, for example due to  HIV/AIDS ,  chemotherapy , diabetes, or medicines that weaken the immune system  Your risk of catching TB increases if you: Are around people who have TB (during overseas travel) Live in crowded or unclean living conditions Have poor nutrition  The following factors can increase the rate of TB infection in a population: Increase in HIV infections Increase in number of homeless people (poor environment and nutrition) Drug-resistant strains of TB  Symptoms 
 
 The primary stage of TB does not cause symptoms. When symptoms of pulmonary TB occur, they can include: Breathing difficulty Chest pain Cough (usually with mucus) Coughing up blood Excessive sweating, especially at night Fatigue Fever Weight loss Wheezing  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Clubbing of the fingers or toes (in people with advanced disease) Swollen or tender lymph nodes in the neck or other areas Fluid around a lung (pleural effusion) Unusual breath sounds (crackles)  Tests that may be ordered include: Bronchoscopy Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Interferon-gamma release blood test, such as the QFT-Gold test to test for TB infection (active or infection in the past) Sputum examination and  cultures Thoracentesis Tuberculin skin test  (also called a PPD test) Biopsy  of the affected tissue (done rarely)  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection with medicines that fight the TB bacteria. Active pulmonary TB is treated with a combination of many medicines (usually four medicines). The person takes the medicines until lab tests show which medicines work best. You may need to take many different pills at different times of the day for 6 months or longer. It is very important that you take the pills the way your provider instructed. When people do not take their TB medicines like they are supposed to, the infection can become much more difficult to treat. The TB bacteria can become resistant to treatment. This means the medicines no longer work. If a person is not taking all the medicines as directed, a provider may need to watch the person take the prescribed medicines. This approach is called directly observed therapy. In this case, medicines may be given 2 or 3 times a week. You may need to stay at home or be admitted to a hospital for 2 to 4 weeks to avoid spreading the disease to others until you are no longer contagious. Your provider is required by law to report your TB illness to the local health department. Your health care team will ensure that you receive the best care. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you feel more in control. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms often improve in 2 to 3 weeks after starting treatment. A chest x-ray will not show this improvement until weeks or months later. Outlook is excellent if pulmonary TB is diagnosed early and effective treatment is started quickly. Possible Complications 
 
 Pulmonary TB can cause permanent lung damage if not treated early. It can also spread to other parts of the body.  Medicines used to treat TB may cause side effects, including: Changes in vision Orange- or brown-colored tears and urine Rash Liver inflammation A vision test may be done before treatment so your doctor can monitor any changes in the health of your eyes. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You think or know you have been exposed to TB You develop symptoms of TB Your symptoms continue despite treatment New symptoms develop  Prevention 
 
 TB is preventable, even in those who have been exposed to an infected person. Skin testing for TB is used in high risk populations or in people who may have been exposed to TB, such as health care workers. People who have been exposed to TB should have a skin test as soon as possible and have a follow-up test at a later date, if the first test is negative.  A positive skin test means you have come into contact with the TB bacteria. It does not mean that you have active TB or are contagious. Talk to your provider about how to prevent getting tuberculosis. Prompt treatment is very important in preventing the spread of TB from those who have active TB to those who have never been infected with TB. Some countries with a high incidence of TB give people a vaccine called BCG to prevent TB. But, the effectiveness of this vaccine is limited and it is not usually used in the United States. People who have had BCG may still be skin tested for TB. Discuss the test results (if positive) with your doctor. Alternative Names 
 
 TB; Tuberculosis - pulmonary Images 
 
 
 Tuberculosis in the kidney 
 Tuberculosis in the lung 
 Tuberculosis, advanced - chest x-rays 
 Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray 
 Pulmonary nodule, solitary - CT scan 
 Miliary tuberculosis 
 Tuberculosis of the lungs 
 Erythema nodosum associated with sarcoidosis 
 Respiratory system 
 Tuberculin skin test 
 References 
 
 Ellner JJ. Tuberculosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 332.  Fitzgerald DW, Sterling TR, Haas DW. Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolan R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 251. Read More 
 
 Chemotherapy 
 Disseminated tuberculosis 
 Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Hepatitis 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Iontophoresis 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia