
 Pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scan involves two  nuclear scan  tests to measure breathing (ventilation) and circulation (perfusion) in all areas of the lungs. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scan is actually two tests. They may be done separately or together. During the perfusion scan, a health care provider injects radioactive albumin into your vein. You are placed on a movable table that is under the arm of a scanner. The machine scans your lungs as blood flows through them to find the location of the radioactive particles. During the ventilation scan, you breathe in radioactive gas through a mask while you are sitting or lying on a table under the scanner arm. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You DO NOT need to stop eating (fast), be on a special diet, or take any medicines before the test. A  chest x-ray  is usually done before or after a ventilation and perfusion scan. You wear a hospital gown or comfortable clothing that does not have metal fasteners. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The table may feel hard or cold. You may feel a sharp prick when the IV is placed in the vein in your arm for the perfusion part of the scan. The mask used during the ventilation scan may make you feel nervous about being in a small space (claustrophobia). You must lie still during the scan. The  radioisotope  injection usually does not cause discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The ventilation scan is used to see how well air moves and blood flows through the lungs. The perfusion scan measures the blood supply through the lungs. A ventilation and perfusion scan is most often done to detect a  pulmonary embolus  (blood clot in the lungs). It is also used to: Detect abnormal circulation (shunts) in the blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary vessels) Test regional (different lung areas) lung function in people with advanced  pulmonary disease , such as  COPD Normal Results 
 
 The provider should take a ventilation and perfusion scan and then evaluate it with a chest x-ray. All parts of both lungs should take up the radioisotope evenly. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If the lungs take up lower than normal amounts of radioisotope during a ventilation or perfusion scan, it may be due to any of the following: Airway obstruction Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Pneumonia Narrowing of the pulmonary artery Pneumonitis (inflammation of the lungs due to breathing in a foreign substance) Pulmonary embolus Reduced breathing and ventilation ability  Risks 
 
 Risks are about the same as for x-rays (radiation) and needle pricks. No radiation is released from the scanner. Instead, it detects radiation and converts it into an image. There is a small exposure to radiation from the radioisotope. The radioisotopes used during scans are short-lived. All of the radiation leaves the body in a few days. However, as with any radiation exposure, caution is advised for pregnant or breast-feeding women. There is a slight risk for infection or bleeding at the site where the needle is inserted. The risk with perfusion scan is the same as with inserting an  intravenous  needle for any other purpose. In rare cases, a person may develop an  allergy  to the radioisotope. This may include a serious  anaphylactic reaction . Considerations 
 
 A pulmonary ventilation and perfusion scan may be a lower-risk alternative to  pulmonary angiography  for evaluating disorders of the lung blood supply. This test may not provide a definite diagnosis, especially in people with lung disease. Other tests may be needed to confirm or rule out the findings of a pulmonary ventilation and perfusion scan. This test has largely been replaced by CT pulmonary angiography for diagnosing pulmonary embolism. However, people with kidney problems or an allergy to contrast dye can more safely have this test. Alternative Names 
 
 V/Q scan; Ventilation/perfusion scan; Lung ventilation/perfusion scan; Pulmonary embolism - V/Q scan; PE- V/Q scan; Blood clot - V/Q scan Images 
 
 
 Albumin injection 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Lung scan, perfusion and ventilation (V/Q scan) - diagnostic norm. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:738-740. Mettler FA, Guiberteau MJ. Respiratory system. In: Mettler FA, Guiberteau MJ, eds.  Essentials of Nuclear Medicine Imaging . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 6. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Lung disease 
 PET scan 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.am.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 COPD 
 Lung Diseases 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Pulmonary Embolism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia