
 Purpura 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Purpura is purple-colored spots and patches that occur on the skin, and in mucus membranes, including the lining of the mouth. Considerations 
 
 Purpura occurs when small blood vessels leak blood under the skin. Purpura measure between 4 and 10 mm (millimeters) in diameter. When purpura spots are less than 4 mm in diameter, they are called  petechiae . Purpura spots larger than 1 cm (centimeter) are called ecchymoses. Platelets  help the blood clot. A person with purpura may have normal platelet counts (non-thrombocytopenic purpuras) or low platelet counts (thrombocytopenic purpuras). Causes 
 
 Non-thrombocytopenic purpuras may be due to: Amyloidosis Blood clotting disorders Congenital cytomegalovirus Congenital  rubella  syndrome Drugs that affect platelet function Fragile blood vessels seen in older people (senile purpura) Hemangioma Inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis), such as  Henoch-Schönlein purpura , which causes a raised type of purpura Pressure changes that occur during vaginal childbirth Scurvy  (vitamin C deficiency) Steroid use Certain infections Injury  Thrombocytopenic purpura may be due to: Drugs that reduce the platelet count Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) Immune neonatal  thrombocytopenia  (can occur in infants whose mothers have ITP) Meningococcemia , a raised type of purpura  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider for an appointment if you have signs of purpura. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine your skin and ask about your medical history and symptoms, including: Is this the first time you have had such spots? When did they develop? What color are they? Do they look like bruises? What medicines do you take? What other medical problems have you had? Does anyone in your family have similar spots? What other symptoms do you have? A  skin biopsy  may be done. Blood tests may be ordered to determine the cause of the purpura. Alternative Names 
 
 Blood spots; Skin hemorrhages Images 
 
 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on the lower legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's foot 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on an infant's legs 
 Henoch-Schonlein purpura on the legs 
 Meningococcemia on the calves 
 Meningococcemia on the leg 
 Rocky mountain spotted fever on the foot 
 Meningococcemia associated purpura 
 References 
 
 Marks JG, Miller JJ. Purpura. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 17. Read More 
 
 Bleeding into the skin 
 Platelet count 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Skin Conditions 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia