
 Pyloroplasty 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pyloroplasty is surgery to widen the opening in the lower part of the stomach (pylorus) so that stomach contents can empty into the small intestine ( duodenum ). The pylorus is a thick, muscular area. When it thickens, food cannot pass through. Description 
 
 The surgery is done while you are under  general anesthesia  (asleep and pain-free).  If you have open surgery, the surgeon: Makes a large surgical cut in your belly to open the area. Cuts through some of the thickened muscle so it becomes wider. Closes the cut in a way that keeps the pylorus open. This allows the stomach to empty.  Surgeons can also do this surgery using a laparoscope. A laparoscope is a tiny camera that is inserted into your belly through a small cut. Video from the camera will appear on a monitor in the operating room. The surgeon views the monitor to do the surgery. During the surgery: Three to five small cuts are made in your belly. The camera and other small tools will be inserted through these cuts. Your belly will be filled with gas to allow the surgeon to see the area and perform the surgery with more room to work. The pylorus is operated on as described above.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Pyloroplasty is used to treat complications in people with  peptic ulcers  or other stomach problems that cause a blockage of the stomach opening. Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medications or  breathing problems Bleeding ,  blood clots , or infection  Risks for this surgery include: Damage to the intestine Hernia Leakage of stomach contents Long-term diarrhea Malnutrition Tear in the lining of nearby organs (mucosal perforation)  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your surgeon: If you are or could be pregnant What medicines you're taking, including medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription  During the days before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. Some of these are aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), and clopidogrel (Plavix). Ask your surgeon which drugs you should still take on the day of the surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your surgeon for help quitting.  On the day of your surgery: Follow instructions about not eating and drinking. Take the medicines your surgeon told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 After surgery, the health care team will monitor your breathing, blood pressure, temperature, and heart rate. Most people can go home within 24 hours. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people recover quickly and completely. The average hospital stay is 2 to 3 days. Most people can slowly begin a regular diet in a few weeks. Alternative Names 
 
 Peptic ulcer - pyloroplasty; PUD - pyloroplasty; Pyloric obstruction - pyloroplasty  References 
 
 Chan FKL, Lau JYW. Peptic ulcer disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 53. Teitelbaum EN, Hungness ES, Mahvi DM. Stomach. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Duodenum 
 Pyloric stenosis - infant 
 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia