
 Pyogenic liver abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pyogenic liver  abscess  is a pus-filled area in the liver. Causes 
 
 There are many possible causes of liver abscesses, including: Abdominal infection, such as  appendicitis ,  diverticulitis , or a  perforated bowel Infection in the blood Infection of the bile draining tubes Recent  endoscopy  of the bile draining tubes Trauma that damages the liver A number of common bacteria may cause liver abscesses. In most cases, more than one type of bacteria is found. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of liver abscess may include: Chest pain (lower right) Pain in the right upper abdomen (more common) or throughout the abdomen (less common) Clay-colored stools Dark urine Fever, chills, nightsweats Loss of appetite Nausea, vomiting Unintentional weight loss Weakness Yellow skin (jaundice) Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Blood culture  for bacteria Complete blood count (CBC) Liver biopsy Liver function tests Treatment 
 
 Treatment usually consists of placing a tube through the skin to drain the abscess. Less often, surgery is needed. You will also receive antibiotics for about 4 to 6 weeks. Sometimes, antibiotics alone can cure the infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition can be life threatening. The risk for death is higher in people who have many liver abscesses. Possible Complications 
 
 Life-threatening  sepsis  can develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Any symptoms of this disorder Severe  abdominal pain Confusion  or  decreased consciousness High fever that doesn't go away Other new symptoms during or after treatment Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of abdominal and other infections may reduce the risk of developing a liver abscess, but most cases are not preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Liver abscess; Bacterial liver abscess Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Pyogenic abscess 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Kim AY, Chung RT. Bacterial, parasitic, and fungal infections of the liver, including liver abscesses. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 84.  Sifri CD, Madoff LC. Infections of the liver and biliary system (liver abscess, cholangitis, cholecystitis). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 77. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Diverticulitis 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia