
 Rape prevention 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rape is defined as a sexual act forced on a person against his or her will. The most useful tool to prevent rape is to be more aware of the issue. Always trust your instincts if you are somewhere or with someone and you do not feel safe and comfortable. Information 
 
 The following safety tips may help reduce your chances of being raped: Carry items that you can use if you need to call attention to your situation (such as whistles and personal alarms). Consider taking a self-defense class. This may give you self-confidence and provide useful skills and strategies for different situations. Do not hitchhike. If your vehicle breaks down and someone offers to give you a ride, ask the person to call for help while you stay locked in your vehicle. If someone tries to assault you, scream loudly or blow a whistle. If you are walking or jogging, stay out of secluded or isolated areas. Arrange to do the activity with at least 1 other friend, rather than alone. It is best to do these kinds of activities during daylight hours. Keep car doors locked while driving, check the back of your car for intruders before getting in, and park your car in an open and well-lit area. Keep doors and windows of your home locked. On public transportation, sit near the driver or up front if possible. Avoid sitting near groups of young men who are out together.  When out by yourself: Avoid getting isolated with people you do not know or do not trust. Be aware of where you are and what is around you. Do not cover both of your ears with music headphones. Keep your cell phone charged and with you. Stay away from deserted areas. Try to appear strong, confident, aware, and secure in your surroundings.  At parties or in other social situations, take the following steps: Go with a group of friends, if possible, or keep in contact with someone you know during the party. Avoid drinking too much. Do not accept drinks from someone you do not know, and keep your drink or beverage close to you. Do not go somewhere alone or leave a party with someone you do not know or feel comfortable with.  If you find yourself in a situation where you are being pressured into sexual activities you do not want, things you can do include:  State clearly what you do not want to do. Remember, you do not need to feel any obligation to do something you are not comfortable doing. Remain aware of your surroundings and how you can get away. Have a special codeword with a friend or family member that you can say if you call them during a situation in which you are being pressured into unwanted sex. If you need to, make up a reason why you need to leave.  RESOURCES Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network:  www.rainn.org/ . Alternative Names 
 
 Date rape - prevention; Sexual assault - prevention References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexual assault and abuse and STDs. In: 2015 sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. Updated June 4, 2015.  www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/sexual-assault.htm . Accessed April 19, 2016. Cowley D, Lentz GM. Emotional aspects of gynecology. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 9. Linden JA. Care of the adult patient after sexual assault.  N Engl J Med . 2011;365:834-841. PMID: 21879901  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21879901 . Sachs CJ, Wheeler M. Examination of the sexual assault victim. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 58. 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexual Assault 
 Browse the Encyclopedia