
 Rat-bite fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rat-bite fever is a rare bacterial disease spread by infected rodents. Causes 
 
 Rat-bite fever can be caused by 2 different bacteria,  Streptobacillus moniliformis  or  Spirillum minus.  Both of these are found in the mouths of rodents. The disease is most often seen in: Asia Europe North America  Most people get rat-bite fever through contact with urine or fluids from the mouth, eye, or nose of an infected animal. This most commonly occurs through a bite, yet some cases may occur simply through contact with these fluids. A rat is usually the source of the infection. Other animals that may cause this infection include:  Gerbils Squirrels Weasels  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the bacteria that caused the infection. Symptoms due to  Streptobacillus moniliformis  may include: Chills Fever Joint pain, redness, or swelling Rash  Symptoms due to  Spirillum minus  may include: Chills Fever Open sore at the site of the bite Rash  with red or purple patches and bumps Swollen lymph nodes near the bite  Exams and Tests 
 
 This condition is diagnosed by detecting the bacteria in: Skin Blood Joint fluid Lymph nodes  Blood antibody tests  and other techniques may also be used. Treatment 
 
 Rat-bite fever is treated with antibiotics for 7 to 14 days. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is excellent with early treatment. If it is not treated, the death rate can be as high as 25%. Possible Complications 
 
 Rat-bite fever may cause these complications:  Abscesses  of the brain or soft tissue Infection of the heart valves Inflammation of the parotid (salivary) glands Inflammation of the tendons Inflammation of the heart lining  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You or your child has had recent contact with a rat or other rodent The person who was bitten has symptoms of rat-bite fever  Prevention 
 
 Avoiding contact with rats or rat-contaminated dwellings may help prevent rat-bite fever. Taking antibiotics by mouth after a rat bite may also help prevent this illness. Alternative Names 
 
 Streptobacillary fever; Streptobacillosis; Haverhill fever; Epidemic arthritic erythema; Spirillary fever; Sodoku References 
 
 Washburn RG. Rat-bite fever:  Streptobacillus moniliformis  and  Spirillum minus . In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 233. Read More 
 
 Endocarditis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Salivary gland infections 
 Tenosynovitis 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia