
 Recognizing medical emergencies 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 According to the American College of Emergency Physicians, the following are warning signs of a medical emergency: Bleeding  that will not stop Breathing problems ( difficulty breathing ,  shortness of breath ) Change in mental status  (such as unusual behavior,  confusion , difficulty arousing) Chest pain Choking Coughing up or  vomiting blood Fainting  or  loss of consciousness Feeling of committing suicide or murder Head or spine injury Severe or persistent  vomiting Sudden injury due to a motor vehicle accident, burns or smoke inhalation, near drowning, deep or large wound, etc. Sudden, severe pain anywhere in the body Sudden  dizziness ,  weakness , or change in vision Swallowing a poisonous substance Upper  abdominal pain  or pressure  BE PREPARED Determine the location and quickest route to the nearest emergency department before an emergency happens. Keep emergency phone numbers posted by the phone. Everyone in your household, including children, should know when and how to call these numbers.  These numbers include:  fire department, police department, poison control center, ambulance center, your doctors' phone numbers, contact numbers of neighbors or nearby friends or relatives, and work phone numbers. Know at which hospital(s) your doctor practices and, if practical, go there in an emergency. Wear a medical identification tag if you have a chronic condition or look for one on a person who has any of the symptoms mentioned. Get a personal emergency response system if you are elderly, especially if you live alone.  WHAT TO DO IF SOMEONE NEEDS HELP Remain calm, and call your local emergency number (such as 911). Start  CPR  (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) or rescue breathing, if necessary and if you know the proper technique. Place a semiconscious or  unconscious  person in the recovery position until the ambulance arrives. DO NOT move the person, however, if there has been or may have been a neck injury.  Upon arriving at an emergency room, the person will be immediately evaluated. Life- or limb-threatening conditions will be treated first. People with conditions that are not life- or limb-threatening may have to wait. CALL YOUR LOCAL EMERGENCY NUMBER (SUCH AS 911) IF: The person's condition is life-threatening (for example, the person is having a  heart attack  or  severe allergic reaction ) The person's condition could become life-threatening on the way to the hospital Moving the person could cause further injury (for example, in case of a neck injury or motor vehicle accident) The person needs the skills or equipment of paramedics Traffic conditions or distance might cause a delay in getting the person to the hospital  Alternative Names 
 
 Medical emergencies - how to recognize them Images 
 
 
 Stopping bleeding with direct pressure 
 Stopping bleeding with a tourniquet 
 Stopping bleeding with pressure and ice 
 Neck pulse 
 References 
 
 Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 190. 
 Review Date 1/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, emergency medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Emergency Medical Services 
 Browse the Encyclopedia