
 Rectal biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A rectal biopsy is a procedure to remove a small piece of tissue from the rectum for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A rectal biopsy is usually part of  anoscopy  or  sigmoidoscopy . These are procedures to view inside the rectum. A  digital rectal exam  is done first. Then, a lubricated instrument (anoscope or proctoscope) is placed into the rectum. You will feel some discomfort when this is done. A  biopsy  can be taken through any of these instruments. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may get a laxative, enema, or other preparation before the biopsy so that you can completely empty your bowel. This will allow the doctor a clear view of the rectum. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There will be some discomfort during the procedure. You may feel like you need to have a bowel movement. You may feel cramping or mild discomfort as the instrument is placed into the rectal area. You may feel a pinch when a biopsy is taken. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A rectal biopsy is used to determine the cause of abnormal growths found during anoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or other tests. It can also be used to confirm the diagnosis of  amyloidosis . Normal Results 
 
 The anus and rectum appear normal in size, color, and shape. There should be no evidence of:  Bleeding Polyps Hemorrhoids Other abnormalities  No problems are seen when the biopsy tissue is examined under a microscope. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 This test is a common way to determine the specific causes of abnormal conditions of the rectum, such as: Abscesses Colorectal polyps Infection Inflammation Tumors Amyloidosis Crohn disease Hirschsprung disease  in infants Ulcerative colitis Risks  
 
 Risks of a rectal biopsy include bleeding and tearing.  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - rectum; Rectal bleeding - biopsy; Rectal polyps - biopsy; Amyloidosis - rectal biopsy; Crohn disease - rectal biopsy; Colorectal cancer - biopsy; Hirschsprung disease - rectal biopsy Images 
 
 
 Rectal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Weinstein WM. Tissue sampling, specimen handling, and chromoendoscopy. In: Ginsberg GG, Gostout CJ, Kochman ML, Norton ID, eds.  Clinical Gastrointestinal Endoscopy . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 5. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Colitis 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Crohn disease 
 Hirschsprung disease 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia