
 Rectal prolapse repair 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rectal prolapse repair is surgery to fix a  rectal prolapse . This is a condition in which the last part of the colon (called the rectum) sticks out through the anus. Description 
 
 Rectal prolapse may be partial, involving only the inner lining of the bowel ( mucosa ). Or, it may be complete, involving the entire wall of the rectum.  For most adults, surgery is used to repair the rectum because there is no other effective treatment. Children with rectal prolapse do not always need surgery, unless their prolapse does not improve over time. In infants, prolapse often disappears without treatment. Most surgical procedures for rectal prolapse are done under  general anesthesia . For older or sicker people,  epidural or spinal anesthesia  may be used. There are 3 basic types of surgery to repair rectal prolapse. Your surgeon will decide which one is best for you. For healthy adults, an abdominal procedure has the best chance of success. While you are under general anesthesia, the doctor makes a surgical cut in the abdomen and removes a portion of the colon. The rectum may be attached (sutured) to the surrounding tissue so it will not slide and fall out through the anus. Sometimes, a soft piece of mesh is wrapped around the rectum to help it stay in place. These procedures can also be done with laparoscopic surgery (also known as keyhole or telescopic surgery).  For older adults or those with other medical problems, an approach through the anus (perineal approach) might be less risky. It might also cause less pain and lead to a shorter recovery. But with this approach, the prolapse is more likely to come back (recur). One of the surgical repairs through the anus involves removing the prolapsed rectum and colon and then suturing the rectum to the surrounding tissues. This procedure can be done under general, epidural, or spinal anesthesia. Very frail or sick people may need a smaller procedure that reinforces the sphincter muscles. This technique encircles the muscles with a band of soft mesh or a silicone tube. This approach provides only short-term improvement and is rarely used. Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general include: Reactions to medicines, breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots  Risks of this surgery include: Infection. If a piece of rectum or colon is removed, the bowel needs to be reconnected. In rare cases, this connection can leak, causing infection. More procedures may be needed to treat the infection. Constipation is very common, although most people have constipation before the surgery. In some people,  incontinence  (loss of bowel control) can get worse. Return of prolapse after abdominal or perineal surgery.  Before the Procedure 
 
 During the 2 weeks before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking medicines that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen, naprosyn, and warfarin. Ask your doctor which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your doctor for help. Be sure to tell your surgeon if you get sick before your surgery. This includes a cold, flu, herpes flare-up, urinary problems, or any other illness. Eat high-fiber foods and drink 6 to 8 glasses of water every day.  The day before your surgery: Eat a light breakfast and lunch. You may be told to drink only clear liquids such as broth, clear juice, and water afternoon. Follow instructions about when to stop eating or drinking. You may be told to use enemas or laxatives to clear out your intestines. If so, follow those instructions exactly.  On the day of your surgery: Take any medicines that your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Be sure to arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 How long you stay in the hospital depends on the procedure. For open abdominal procedures it may be 5 to 8 days. You will go home sooner if you had laparoscopic surgery. The stay for perineal surgery may be 2 to 3 days. You should make a complete recovery in 4 to 6 weeks. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The surgery usually works well at repairing the prolapse. Constipation and incontinence can be problems for some people. Alternative Names 
 
 Rectal prolapse surgery; Anal prolapse surgery Images 
 
 
 Rectal prolapse repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Fry RD, Mahmoud NN, Maron DJ, Bleier JIS. Colon and rectum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 52. Pidala MJ. Rectal prolapse. In: Bailey HR, Billingham RP, Stamos MJ, Snyder MJ, eds.  Colorectal Surgery . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Bladder exstrophy repair 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Encopresis 
 Hysterectomy 
 Mucosa 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Rectal prolapse 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia