
 Rectal prolapse 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rectal prolapse occurs when the rectum falls and comes through the anal opening. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of rectal prolapse is unclear. Possible causes may include any of the following: Defect in the pelvic floor through which hernia may slip down Loose muscles of the anal sphincter An abnormally long colon Downward movement of the abdominal cavity between the rectum and uterus  Prolapse of the small intestine Constipation Diarrhea Chronic coughing and sneezing A prolapse can be partial or complete: With a partial prolapse, the inner lining of the rectum bulges partly from the anus. With a complete prolapse, the entire rectum bulges through the anus. Rectal prolapse occurs most often in children under age 6. Health problems that may lead to prolapse include: Cystic fibrosis Intestinal worm infections Long-term diarrhea Other health problems present at birth In adults, it is usually found with constipation, or with a muscle or nerve problem in the pelvic or genital area. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a reddish-colored mass that sticks out from the opening of the anus, especially after a bowel movement. This reddish mass is actually the inner lining of the rectum. It may bleed slightly and can be uncomfortable and painful. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam, which will include a  rectal exam . To check for prolapse, provider may ask the person to bear down while sitting on a commode. Tests that may be done include: Colonoscopy  to confirm the diagnosis Hemoglobin test  if there is bleeding from the rectum Treatment 
 
 Call your provider if a rectal prolapse occurs. In some cases, the prolapse can be treated at home. Follow your provider's instructions on how to do this. The rectum must be pushed back inside manually. A soft, warm, wet cloth is used to apply gentle pressure to the mass to push it back through the anal opening. The person should lie on 1 side in a knee-chest position before applying pressure. This position allows gravity to help put the rectum back into position. Immediate surgery is rarely needed. In children, treating the cause often solves the problem. For example, if the cause is straining because of dry stools, laxatives may help. If the prolapse continues, surgery may be needed. In adults, the only cure for rectal prolapse is a procedure that repairs the weakened anal sphincter and pelvic muscles. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In children, treating the cause cures rectal prolapse. In adults, surgery usually cures the prolapse. When rectal prolapse is not treated, constipation and loss of bowel control may develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if there is a rectal prolapse. Prevention 
 
 In children, treating the cause usually prevents rectal prolapse from happening again.  Alternative Names 
 
 Procidentia; Rectal intussusception Images 
 
 
 Rectal prolapse 
 Rectal prolapse repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF. Surgical conditions of the anus and rectum. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 344. Lembo AJ. Constipation. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 19. Madoff RD. Diseases of the rectum and anus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 145. Read More 
 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Constipation in infants and children 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Malabsorption 
 Mucosa 
 Whipworm infection 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pelvic Support Problems 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia