
 Refrigerant poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A refrigerant is a chemical that makes things cold. This article discusses poisoning from sniffing or swallowing such chemicals. The most common poisoning occurs when people intentionally sniff a type of refrigerant called Freon. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredient includes fluorinated hydrocarbons. Where Found 
 
 The poisonous ingredients may be found in: Various refrigerants Some fumigants This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 LUNGS Breathing difficulty Throat  swelling  (which may also cause breathing difficulty)  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue Loss of vision  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Burns of the food pipe (esophagus) Vomiting blood Blood in the stool  HEART AND BLOOD Irregular heart rhythms Collapse  SKIN Irritation Burn Necrosis (holes) in the skin or underlying tissues  Most symptoms result from breathing in the substance. Home Care 
 
 Seek emergency medical care right away. Move the person to fresh air. Be careful to avoid being overcome with the fumes while helping someone else. Contact poison control for further information. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition
    The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
    The time it was swallowed or inhaled
    The amount swallowed or inhaled Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Intravenous (IV) fluids through the vein Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Medicine (antidote) to reverse the effect of the poison Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days Skin debridement (surgical removal of burned skin) Breathing tube Oxygen  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the severity of the poisoning and how quickly medical help was received. Severe lung damage may occur. Survival past 72 hours usually means the person will have a complete recovery. Sniffing Freon is extremely dangerous and can lead to long-term brain damage and sudden death. Alternative Names 
 
 Coolant poisoning; Freon poisoning; Fluorinated hydrocarbon poisoning; Sudden sniffing death syndrome References 
 
 Gummin DD. Hydrocarbons. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 152. Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, et al., eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 63. 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia