
 Renal papillary necrosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Renal papillary necrosis is a disorder of the kidneys in which all or part of the renal papillae die. The renal papillae are the areas where the openings of the collecting ducts enter the kidney and where urine flows into the ureters. Causes 
 
 Renal papillary necrosis often occurs with  analgesic nephropathy . This is damage to one or both kidneys caused by overexposure to pain medicines. But, other conditions can also cause renal papillary necrosis, including: Diabetic nephropathy Kidney infection (pyelonephritis) Kidney transplant rejection Sickle cell anemia , a common cause of renal papillary necrosis in children Urinary tract blockage Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of renal papillary necrosis may include: Back pain or  flank pain Bloody, cloudy, or dark urine Tissue pieces in the urine Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Fever and chills Painful urination Needing to urinate more often than usual (frequent urination) or a sudden, strong urge to urinate (urgency) Difficulty starting or maintaining a urine stream ( urinary hesitancy ) Urinary incontinence Urinating large amounts Urinating often at night Exams and Tests 
 
 The area over the affected kidney (in the flank) may feel tender during an exam. There may be a history of urinary tract infections. There may be signs of  blocked urine flow  or kidney failure. Tests that may be done include: Urine test Blood tests Ultrasound, CT, or other imaging tests of the kidneys Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for renal papillary necrosis. Treatment depends on the cause. For example, if analgesic nephropathy is the cause, your doctor will recommend that you stop using the medicine that is causing it. This may allow the kidney to heal over time. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does, depends on what is causing the condition. If the cause can be controlled, the condition may go away on its own. Sometimes, people with this condition develop kidney failure and will need  dialysis  or a  kidney transplant . Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from renal papillary necrosis include: Kidney infection Kidney stones Kidney cancer, especially in people who take a lot of pain medicines When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: You have  bloody urine You develop other symptoms of renal papillary necrosis, especially after taking over-the-counter pain medicines Prevention 
 
 Controlling diabetes or sickle cell anemia may reduce your risk. To prevent renal papillary necrosis from analgesic nephropathy, follow your provider's instructions when using medicines, including over-the-counter pain relievers. Do not take more than the recommended dose without asking your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Necrosis - renal papillae; Renal medullary necrosis Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 Ruggenenti P, Cravedi P, Remuzzi G. Microvascular and macrovascular diseases of the kidney. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 34. Zhou M, Netto GJ, Epstein JI. Renal papillary necrosis. In: Zhou M, Netto GJ, Epstein JI, eds.  High-Yield Uropathology . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:253. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Diabetes and kidney disease 
 High potassium level 
 Hypovolemic shock 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Necrosis 
 Renal 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Urinary tract infection - children 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia