
 Repair of webbed fingers or toes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Repair of  webbed fingers or toes  is surgery to fix webbing of the toes, fingers, or both. The middle and ring fingers or the second and third toes are most often affected. Description 
 
 Surgery is done the following way: General anesthesia  will be given. This means the person is asleep and unable to feel pain. Or regional anesthesia ( spinal and epidural ) is given to numb the arm and hand. The surgeon marks the areas of the skin that need repair. The skin is cut into flaps, and the soft tissues are cut to separate the fingers or toes. The flaps are sewn into position. If needed, skin taken ( graft ) from other areas of the body is used to cover places that are missing skin. The hand or foot is then wrapped with a bulky bandage or cast so that it can’t move. This allows healing to take place. Simple webbing of fingers or toes involves only the skin and other soft tissues. The surgery is more complicated when it involves fused bones, nerves, blood vessels, and tendons. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This surgery is advised if the webbing causes problems with appearance, or in using the fingers or toes. Generally, the repairs are done when a child is between 6 months and 2 years old. Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general include: Problems breathing Reactions to medicines Bleeding, blood clot, or infection  Other possible complications related to this surgery include the following: Damage from not getting enough blood in the hand or foot, due to the cast Loss of skin grafts Stiffness of the fingers or toes Injuries to the blood vessels, tendons, or bones in the fingers  Call your provider if you notice the following: Fever Fingers that tingle, are numb, or have a bluish tinge Severe pain Swelling  After the Procedure 
 
 Most people stay in the hospital for 1 to 2 days. Sometimes the cast extends beyond the fingers or toes to protect the repaired area from injury. Small children who had webbed finger repair may need a cast that reaches above the elbow. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The repair is usually successful. When joined fingers share a single fingernail, the creation of two normal-looking nails is rarely possible. One nail will look more normal than the other. Some children require a second surgery if the webbing is complicated.  The separated fingers will never look or function the same.  Alternative Names 
 
 Web finger repair; Web toe repair; Syndactyly repair; Syndactyly release Images 
 
 
 Before and after webbed finger repair 
 Syndactyly 
 Repair of webbed fingers  - series 
 References 
 
 Kay SP, McCombe DB, Kozin SH. Deformities of the hand and fingers. In: Wolfe SW, Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, Kozin SH, Cohen MS, eds.  Green's Operative Hand Surgery . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 36. Mauck BM, Jobe MT. Congenital anomalies of the hand. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, Canale ST, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 79. Read More 
 
 Webbing of the fingers or toes 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Finger Injuries and Disorders 
 Toe Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia