
 Reportable diseases 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Reportable diseases are diseases considered to be of great public health importance. Local, state, and national agencies (for example, county and state health departments or the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) require that these diseases be reported when they are diagnosed by doctors or laboratories. Reporting allows for the collection of statistics that show how often the disease occurs. This helps researchers identify disease trends and track disease outbreaks. This information can help control future outbreaks. Information 
 
 All states have a "reportable diseases" list. It is the responsibility of the health care provider, not the patient, to report cases of these diseases. Many diseases on the list must also be reported to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Reportable diseases are divided into several groups: Mandatory written reporting. A report of the disease must be made in writing. Examples are  gonorrhea  and  salmonellosis . Mandatory reporting by telephone.The provider must make a report by phone. Examples are  rubeola  (measles) and  pertussis  (whooping cough). Report of total number of cases. Examples are  chickenpox  and  influenza . Cancer. Cancer cases are reported to the state Cancer Registry.  Many of the diseases that are reportable to the CDC include: Anthrax Arboviral diseases (diseases caused by viruses spread by mosquitoes, sandflies, ticks, etc.) such as  West Nile virus , eastern and western equine  encephalitis Botulism Brucellosis Chancroid Chickenpox Chlamydia trachomatis Cholera Coccidioidomycosis Cryptosporidiosis Cyclosporiasis Diphtheria Giardiasis Gonorrhea Haemophilus influenza, invasive disease Hansen disease (leprosy) Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome Hemolytic uremic syndrome , post-diarrheal Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Influenza-related infant deaths Legionellosis Listeriosis Lyme disease Malaria Measles Meningococcal  disease Mumps Novel influenza A virus infections Pertussis Plague Poliomyelitis Poliovirus infection, nonparalytic Psittacosis Q-fever Rabies  (human and animal cases) Rocky Mountain spotted fever Rubella  (including congenital syndrome) Salmonellosis Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) Shiga toxin-producing  Escherichia coli  (STEC) Shigellosis Smallpox Syphilis , including congenital syphilis Tetanus Toxic shock syndrome  (other than streptococcal) Trichinosis Tuberculosis Tularemia Typhoid fever Vancomycin intermediate  Staphylococcus aureus  (VRSA) Vancomycin resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  (VRSA) Vibriosis Yellow fever The county or state health department will try to find the source of many of these illnesses, such as food poisoning. In the case of sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs) the county or state will try to locate sexual contacts of infected people to make sure they are disease-free or are treated if they are already infected. The information gained from reporting allows the county or state to make informed decisions and laws about activities and the environment, such as: Animal control Food handling Immunization programs Insect control STD tracking Water purification  The health care provider is required by law to report these diseases. By cooperating with state health workers, you can help them locate the source of an infection or prevent the spread of an epidemic. Alternative Names 
 
 Notifiable diseases Images 
 
 
 Legionnaires' disease organism, legionella 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS). Last updated May 4, 2015. Available at:  wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss . Accessed September 9, 2015. 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia