
 Respiratory acidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Respiratory acidosis is a condition that occurs when the lungs cannot remove all of the carbon dioxide the body produces. This causes body fluids, especially the blood, to become too acidic. Causes 
 
 Causes of respiratory acidosis include: Diseases of the airways (such as  asthma  and  COPD ) Diseases of the lung tissue (such as  pulmonary fibrosis , which causes scarring and thickening of the lungs) Diseases of the chest (such as scoliosis) Diseases affecting the nerves and muscles that signal the lungs to inflate or deflate Drugs that suppress breathing (including powerful pain medicines, such as narcotics, and "downers," such as benzodiazepines), often when combined with alcohol Severe obesity, which restricts how much the lungs can expand Obstructive sleep apnea Chronic respiratory acidosis occurs over a long time. This leads to a stable situation, because the kidneys increase body chemicals, such as bicarbonate, that help restore the body's acid-base balance. Acute respiratory acidosis is a condition in which carbon dioxide builds up very quickly, before the kidneys can return the body to a state of balance. Some people with chronic respiratory acidosis get acute respiratory acidosis because an illness makes their condition worse. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Confusion Easy fatigue Lethargy Shortness of breath Sleepiness Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms.  Tests that may be done include: Arterial  blood gas , which measures oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood Basic metabolic panel Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Pulmonary function test  to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the underlying disease, and may include: Bronchodilator drugs to reverse some types of airway obstruction Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (sometimes called  CPAP  or BiPAP) or a breathing machine, if needed Oxygen if the blood oxygen level is low Treatment to  stop smoking For severe cases, a  breathing machine  might be needed Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the disease causing the respiratory acidosis. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Poor organ function Respiratory failure Shock When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Severe respiratory acidosis is a medical emergency. Seek immediate medical help if you have symptoms of this condition. Call your provider if you have symptoms of lung disease that suddenly get worse. Prevention 
 
 DO NOT smoke. Smoking leads to the development of many severe lung diseases that can cause respiratory acidosis. Losing weight may help prevent respiratory acidosis due to obesity (obesity-hypoventilation syndrome). Be careful about taking sedating medicines, and never combine these medicines with alcohol. Use your CPAP device regularly if it's been prescribed for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Ventilatory failure; Respiratory failure; Acidosis - respiratory Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Effros RM, Swenson ER. Acid-base balance. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 7. Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Asthma 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Respiratory Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia