
 Retinitis pigmentosa 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Retinitis pigmentosa is an eye disease in which there is damage to the  retina . The retina is the layer of tissue at the back of the inner eye. This layer converts light images to nerve signals and sends them to the brain. Causes 
 
 Retinitis pigmentosa can run in families. The disorder can be caused by several genetic defects. The cells controlling night vision (rods) are most likely to be affected. However, in some cases, retinal cone cells are damaged the most. The main sign of the disease is the presence of dark deposits in the retina. The main risk factor is a family history of retinitis pigmentosa. It is a rare condition affecting about 1 in 4,000 people in the United States. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms often first appear in childhood. However, severe vision problems do not often develop before early adulthood. Decreased vision at night or in low light. Early signs may include having a harder time moving around in the dark. Loss of side (peripheral) vision, causing "tunnel vision." Loss of  central  vision (in advanced cases). This will affect the ability to read. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to evaluate the retina: Color vision Exam of the retina by  ophthalmoscopy  after the pupils have been dilated Fluorescein angiography Intraocular pressure Measurement of the electrical activity in the retina ( electroretinogram ) Pupil reflex response Refraction test Retinal photography Side vision test (visual field test) Slit lamp examination Visual acuity Treatment 
 
 There is no effective treatment for this condition. Wearing sunglasses to protect the retina from ultraviolet light may help preserve vision. Some studies suggest that treatment with antioxidants (such as high doses of vitamin A palmitate) may slow the disease. However, taking high doses of vitamin A can cause serious liver problems. The benefit of treatment has to be weighed against risks to the liver. Clinical trials are in progress to assess new treatments for retinitis pigmentosa, including the use of DHA, which is an omega-3 fatty acid. Other treatments, such as microchip implants into the retina that act like a microscopic video camera, are in the early stages of development. These treatments may be useful for treating blindness associated with RP and other serious eye conditions. A vision specialist can help you adapt to vision loss. Make regular visits to an eye care specialist, who can detect  cataracts  or retinal swelling. Both of these problems can be treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disorder will continue to progress slowly. Complete blindness is uncommon. Possible Complications 
 
 Peripheral and central  loss of vision  will occur over time. People with retinitis pigmentosa often develop cataracts at an early age. They may also develop swelling of the retina (macular edema). Cataracts can be removed if they contribute to vision loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you have problems with night vision or you develop other symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling and testing may help determine whether your children are at risk for this disease. Alternative Names 
 
 RP; Vision loss - RP; Night vision loss - RP; Rod Cone dystrophy; Peripheral vision loss - RP Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Slit-lamp exam 
 References 
 
 Berson EL. Retinitis pigmentosa and allied retinal diseases. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3, chap 24. Cukras CA, Xein WM, Caruso RC, Sieving PA. Progressive and 'stationary' inherited retinal degenerations. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6.13.  National Eye Institute (NEI). Facts about retinitis pigmentosa.Updated May 2014.  nei.nih.gov/health/pigmentosa/pigmentosa_facts . Accessed April 13, 2016. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl ED, et al. Disorders of the retina and vitreous. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 630. Stingl K, Bartz-Schmidt KU, Besch D, et al. Artificial vision with wirelessly powered subretinal electronic implant alpha-IMS.  Proc Biol Sci.  2013;280(1757):1471-2954. PMID: 23427175  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23427175 .
 Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Mucopolysaccharides 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Peripheral 
 Retina 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 3/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Retinal Disorders 
 Usher Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia