
 Retinal artery occlusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Retinal artery occlusion is a blockage in one of the small arteries that carry blood to the  retina . The retina is a layer of tissue in the back of the eye that is able to sense light.  Causes 
 
 Retinal arteries may become blocked when a  blood clot  or fat deposits get stuck in the arteries. These blockages are more likely if there is hardening of the arteries ( atherosclerosis ) in the eye. Clots may travel from other parts of the body and block an artery in the retina. The most common sources of clots are the heart and carotid artery in the neck. Most blockages occur in people with conditions such as: Carotid artery disease , in which the two large blood vessels in the neck become narrowed or blocked Diabetes Heart rhythm problem ( atrial fibrillation ) Heart valve problem High levels of fat in the blood (hyperlipidemia) High blood pressure Intravenous drug abuse Temporal arteritis  (damage to arteries due to an immune response)  If a branch of the retinal artery is blocked, part of the retina will not receive enough blood and oxygen. If this happens, you may lose part of your vision. Symptoms 
 
 Sudden blurring or loss of vision may occur in: All of one eye (central retinal artery occlusion or CRAO) Part of one eye (branch retinal artery occlusion or BRAO) The retinal artery occlusion may last for only a few seconds or minutes, or it may be permanent. A blood clot in the eye may be a warning sign of clots elsewhere. A clot in the brain may cause a stroke. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to evaluate the retina may include: Examination of the retina after dilating the pupil Fluorescein angiography Intraocular pressure Pupil reflex response Refraction Retinal photography Slit lamp examination Testing of side vision (visual field examination) Visual acuity General tests should include: Blood pressure Blood tests, including cholesterol and  triglyceride levels  and the  erythrocyte sedimentation rate Physical examination Tests to identify the source of a clot from another part of the body: Echocardiogram Electrocardiogram Heart monitor for abnormal heart rhythm Duplex Doppler ultrasound of the carotid arteries Treatment 
 
 There is no proven treatment for vision loss that involves the whole eye, unless it is caused by another illness that can be treated. Several treatments may be tried. To be helpful, these treatments must be given within 2 to 4 hours after symptoms begin. However, the benefit of these treatments has never been proven, and they are rarely used. Breathing in (inhaling) a carbon dioxide-oxygen mixture. This treatment causes the arteries of the retina to widen (dilate). Massage of the eye The clot-busting drug, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) The health care provider should look for the cause of the blockage. Blockages may be signs of a life-threatening medical problem. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with blockages of the retinal artery may not get their vision back. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Glaucoma  (CRAO only) Partial or complete loss of vision in the affected eye Stroke (due to the same factors that contribute to retinal artery occlusion, not due to the occlusion itself)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have sudden blurring or vision loss. Prevention 
 
 Measures used to prevent other blood vessel (vascular) diseases, such as  coronary artery disease , may decrease the risk of retinal artery occlusion. These include: Eating a low-fat diet Exercising Stopping smoking Losing weight if you are overweight Sometimes, blood thinners may be used to prevent the artery from becoming blocked again. Aspirin or other anti-clotting drugs are used if the problem is in the carotid arteries. Warfarin or other more potent blood thinners are used if the problem is in the heart. Alternative Names 
 
 Central retinal artery occlusion; Branch retinal artery occlusion; CRAO; BRAO; Vision loss - retinal artery occlusion; Blurry vision - retinal artery occlusion Images 
 
 
 Retina 
 References 
 
 Crouch ER, Crouch ER, Grant TR. Ophthalmology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel D, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Duker JS. Retinal arterial obstruction. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 6.18. Reiss GR, Sipperley JO, Gaitan JR. Glaucoma associated with retinal disorders and retinal surgery. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3;chap 54E. Sanborn GE, Magargal LE. Arterial obstructive disease of the eye. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3;chap 14. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Acquired platelet function defect 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Blood clots 
 Diabetes 
 Glaucoma 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 High blood pressure 
 Retina 
 Stroke 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 3/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Retinal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia