
 Retrograde ejaculation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Retrograde ejaculation occurs when semen enters the bladder instead of going out through the urethra during ejaculation. Causes 
 
 Retrograde ejaculation is uncommon. It most often occurs when the opening of the bladder (bladder neck) does not close. This causes semen to go backwards into the bladder rather than forwards out of the penis. Retrograde ejaculation may be caused by: Diabetes Some medicines including, drugs used to treat  high blood pressure  and some mood-altering drugs Medicines or surgery to treat prostate or urethra problems Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Cloudy urine after orgasms Little or no semen is released during ejaculation  Exams and Tests 
 
 A  urinalysis  that is taken soon after ejaculation will show a large amount of sperm in the urine. Treatment 
 
 Your health care provider may recommend that you stop taking any medicines that may cause retrograde ejaculation. This can make the problem go away. Retrograde ejaculation that is caused by diabetes or surgery may be treated with drugs such as pseudoephedrine or imipramine. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the problem is caused by a medication, normal ejaculation will often come back after the drug is stopped. Retrograde ejaculation caused by surgery or diabetes often cannot be corrected.  Possible Complications 
 
 The condition may cause  infertility . However, semen can often be removed from the bladder and used during assistive reproductive techniques.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you are worried about this problem or are having troubles conceiving a child.  Prevention 
 
 To avoid this condition: If you have diabetes, maintain good control of your blood sugar. Avoid drugs that can cause this problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Ejaculation retrograde; Dry climax Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive system 
 References 
 
 Bhasin S, Basson R. Sexual dysfunction in men and women. In: Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 20. Goldstein M. Surgical management of male infertility. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 22.  Heidelbaugh JJ. Management of erectile dysfunction.  Am Fam Physician.  2010;81:305-312. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 High blood pressure 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Prostate resection - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Radical prostatectomy - discharge 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate - discharge  
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Male Infertility 
 Sexual Problems in Men 
 Browse the Encyclopedia