
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rhabdomyolysis is the breakdown of muscle tissue that leads to the release of muscle fiber contents into the blood. These substances are harmful to the kidney and often cause kidney damage. Causes 
 
 When muscle is damaged, a protein called myoglobin is released into the bloodstream. It is then filtered out of the body by the kidneys. Myoglobin breaks down into substances that can damage kidney cells. Rhabdomyolysis may be caused by injury or any other condition that damages skeletal muscle. Problems that may lead to this disease include: Trauma or crush injuries Use of drugs such as  cocaine , amphetamines, statins,  heroin , or PCP Genetic muscle diseases Extremes of body temperature Ischemia or death of muscle tissue Low phosphate levels Seizures  or muscle tremors Severe exertion, such as marathon running or calisthenics Lengthy surgical procedures Severe dehydration  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Dark, red, or cola-colored urine Decreased urine output General weakness Muscle stiffness or aching ( myalgia ) Muscle tenderness Weakness  of the affected muscles  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Fatigue Joint pain Seizures Weight gain (unintentional) Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam will show tender or damaged skeletal muscles. The following tests may be done: Creatine kinase  (CK) level Serum calcium Serum myoglobin Serum potassium Urinalysis Urine myoglobin  test  This disease may also affect the results of the following tests: CK isoenzymes Serum creatinine Urine creatinine Treatment 
 
 You will need to get fluids containing bicarbonate to help prevent kidney damage. You may need to get fluids through a vein (IV). Some people may need kidney dialysis. Your health care provider may prescribe medicines including diuretics and bicarbonate (if there is enough urine output). Hyperkalemia  and low blood calcium levels (hypocalcemia) should be treated right away.  Kidney failure  should also be treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the amount of  kidney damage . Acute kidney failure occurs in many people. Getting treated soon after rhabdomyolysis begins will reduce the risk of permanent kidney damage. People with milder cases may return to their normal activities within a few weeks to a month. However, some people continue to have problems with fatigue and muscle pain. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute tubular necrosis Acute renal failure Harmful chemical imbalances in the blood Shock  (low blood pressure)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of rhabdomyolysis. Prevention 
 
 Drink plenty of fluids after strenuous exercise. This will help to dilute your urine and flush any myoglobin that is released from your muscles out of your kidneys. Also drink a lot of fluids after any condition that may have damaged skeletal muscle. Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 O'Connor FG, Deuster PA. Rhabdomyolysis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 115. Shafuddin AA, Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM, et al. Acute kidney injury. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Arterial embolism 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Heat emergencies 
 Heat intolerance 
 Necrosis 
 Seizures 
 Shock 
 Toxicology screen 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, Affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia