
 Rickettsialpox 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rickettsialpox is a disease spread by a mite. It causes a chickenpox-like  rash  on the body. Causes 
 
 Rickettsialpox is caused by the bacteria,  Rickettsia akari . It is commonly found in the United States in New York City and other city areas. It also has been seen in Europe, South Africa, Korea, and Russia. The bacteria are spread by the bite of a mite that lives on mice. Symptoms 
 
 The disease begins at the site of the  mite bite  as a painless, firm, red lump ( nodule ). The nodule develops into a fluid-filled  blister  that bursts and crusts over. This lump may be up to 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) wide. Symptoms usually develop 6 to 15 days after coming in contact with the bacteria. Other symptoms may include: Discomfort in bright light ( photophobia ) Fever and chills Muscle pain Rash that looks like  chickenpox Sweating  The rash is not painful and usually clears within a week. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do an examination to look for a rash similar to the one in chickenpox. If rickettsialpox is suspected, these tests will likely be done:  Complete blood count ( CBC ) Tests of blood serum (serologic studies) Swabbing and  culture of the rash Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection by taking antibiotics. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A full recovery is expected when antibiotics are taken as instructed. Possible Complications 
 
 There are usually no complications if the infection is treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child has symptoms of rickettsialpox. Prevention 
 
 Controlling mice helps prevent the spread of rickettsialpox. Alternative Names 
 
  
 Rickettsia akari References 
 
 Paddock CD. Rickettsialpox. In: Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET, eds.  Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Emerging Infectious Diseases . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 65. Raoult D.  Rickettsia akari  (Rickettsialpox). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 189. Read More 
 
 Endemic 
 Fever 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Rashes 
 Skin nodules 
 Vesicles 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia