
 Ringworm 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ringworm is a skin infection due to a fungus or yeast. Often, there are several patches of ringworm on the skin at once. The medical name for ringworm is tinea. Causes 
 
 Ringworm is common, especially among children. But, it can affect people of all ages. It is caused by a fungus or yeast, not a worm like the name suggests. Many bacteria, fungi, and yeast live on your body. Some of these are useful, while others can cause infections. Ringworm occurs when a type of fungus or yeast grows and multiplies on your skin. Ringworm can spread easily from one person to another. You can catch ringworm if you touch someone who has the infection, or if you come into contact with items contaminated by the fungus, such as combs, unwashed clothing, and shower or pool surfaces. You can also catch ringworm from pets that carry the fungus. Cats are common carriers. The fungus that causes ringworm thrive in warm, moist areas. Ringworm is more likely when you are often wet (such as from sweating) and from minor injuries to your skin, scalp, or nails. Ringworm can affect the skin on your: Beard,  tinea barbae Body,  tinea corporis Feet,  tinea pedis  (also called athlete's foot) Groin area,  tinea cruris  (also called jock itch) Scalp,  tinea capitis Alternative Names 
 
 Dermatophytid; Tinea Images 
 
 
 Dermatitis, reaction to tinea 
 Ringworm, tinea corporis on an infant's leg 
 Ringworm, tinea capitis - close-up 
 Ringworm, tinea on the hand and leg 
 Ringworm, tinea manuum on the finger 
 Ringworm, tinea corporis on the leg 
 Tinea (ringworm) 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Superficial fungal infections. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:chap 13. Hay RJ. Dermatophytosis (ringworm) and other superficial mycoses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 268. Read More 
 
 Athlete's foot 
 Cellulitis 
 Contact dermatitis 
 Jock itch 
 Ringworm of the body 
 Ringworm of the scalp 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tinea Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia