
 Risks of tobacco 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tobacco is a plant. Its leaves are smoked, chewed, or sniffed for a variety of effects. Tobacco contains the chemical nicotine, which is an addictive substance. Tobacco smoke contains more than 7000 chemicals, 69 of which are known to cause cancer. Tobacco that is not burned is called smokeless tobacco. Including nicotine, there are 29 chemicals in smokeless tobacco that are known to cause cancer.  HEALTH RISKS OF SMOKING OR USING SMOKELESS TOBACCO  Knowing the serious health risks of using tobacco may help motivate you to quit. Using tobacco over a long time can increase your risk of many health problems. Heart and blood vessel problems: Blood clots  and  weakness in the walls of blood vessels  in the brain, which can lead to  stroke Blood clots in the legs , which may travel to the lungs Coronary artery disease , including  angina  and heart attacks Temporarily increased  blood pressure  after smoking Poor blood supply to the legs Problems with erections  because of decreased blood flow into the penis  Other health risks or problems:  Cancer (more likely in the lung, mouth, larynx, nose and sinuses, throat, esophagus, stomach, bladder, kidney, pancreas, cervix, colon, and rectum) Poor wound healing after surgery Lung problems, such as COPD or asthma that is harder to control Problems during pregnancy, such as babies born at a low birth weight,  early labor ,  losing your baby , and  cleft lip Decreased ability to taste and smell Harm to sperm, which may lead to  infertility Loss of sight due to an increased risk of  macular degeneration Tooth and gum diseases Wrinkling of the skin  Smokers who switch to smokeless tobacco instead of quitting tobacco still have health risks: Increased risk of mouth or nasal cancer Gum problems, tooth wear, and  cavities Worsening high blood pressure and angina  HEALTH RISKS OF SECONDHAND SMOKE  Those who are often around the smoke of others (secondhand smoke) have a higher risk of: Heart attack and heart disease Lung cancer Sudden and severe reactions, including of the eye, nose, throat, and lower respiratory tract  Infants and children who are often exposed to secondhand smoke are at risk of: Asthma flares (children with asthma who live with a smoker are much more likely to visit the emergency room) Infections of the mouth, throat, sinuses, ears, and lungs Lung damage (poor lung function) Sudden infant death syndrome ( SIDS )  Like any addiction, quitting tobacco is difficult, especially if you are doing it alone.  Seek support from family members, friends, and coworkers. Talk to your health care provider about  nicotine replacement therapy  and  smoking cessation medicines . Join a  smoking cessation program  and you will have a much better chance of success. Such programs are offered by hospitals, health departments, community centers, and work sites.  Alternative Names 
 
 Secondhand smoke - risks; Cigarette smoking - risks; Smoking and smokeless tobacco - risks; Nicotine - risks Images 
 
 
 Tobacco and vascular disease 
 Tobacco and chemicals 
 Tobacco and cancer 
 Tobacco health risks 
 Secondhand smoke and lung cancer 
 Respiratory cilia 
 References 
 
 Benowitz NL, Brunetta PG. Smoking hazards and cessation. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 46. Rakel RE, Houston T. Nicotine addiction. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 49. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2015;163(8):622-634. PMID: 26389730  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26389730 . Read More 
 
 Angioplasty and stent placement -- peripheral arteries 
 Carotid artery surgery 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge  
 Angioplasty and stent placement - carotid artery - discharge  
 Angioplasty and stent placement - peripheral arteries - discharge  
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge 
 Carotid artery surgery - discharge 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Smoking 
 Browse the Encyclopedia