
 Routine sputum culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Routine sputum culture is a laboratory test that looks for germs that cause infection. Sputum is the material that comes up from air passages when you cough deeply How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sputum sample is needed. You will be asked to cough deeply and spit any phlegm that comes up from your lungs into a special container. The sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria or other disease-causing germs grow. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Drinking a lot of water and other fluids the night before the test may make it easier to cough up the sputum.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will need to cough. Sometimes the health care provider will tap on your chest to loosen deep sputum. Or, you may be asked to inhale a steamlike mist to help you cough up the sputum. You may have some discomfort from having to cough deeply. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test helps identify the bacteria or other type of germs that are causing an infection in the lungs or airways (bronchi).  Normal Results 
 
 In a normal sputum sample there will be no disease-causing germs.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If the sputum sample is abnormal, the results are called "positive." Identifying the bacteria, fungus, or virus may help diagnose the cause of: Bronchitis  (swelling and inflammation in the main passages that carry air to the lungs) Lung abscess (collection of pus in the lung) Pneumonia Tuberculosis Flare up of  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD) or  cystic fibrosis Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Sputum culture Images 
 
 
 Sputum test 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Culture, routine. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:409-411. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Atypical pneumonia 
 Blastomycosis 
 Bronchiectasis 
 Bronchitis - acute 
 Cough 
 Cryptococcosis 
 Disseminated tuberculosis 
 Histoplasmosis - acute (primary) pulmonary 
 Hospital-acquired pneumonia 
 Mycoplasma pneumonia 
 Plague 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Pulmonary aspergilloma 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Viral pneumonia 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Bronchitis 
 Pneumonia 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia