
 Rubella 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rubella, also known as the German measles, is an infection in which there is a rash on the skin. Congenital rubella  is when a pregnant woman with rubella passes it to the baby that is still in her womb. Causes 
 
 Rubella is caused by a virus that is spread through the air or by close contact. A person with rubella may spread the disease to others from 1 week before the rash begins, until 1 to 2 weeks after the rash disappears. Because the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine is given to most children, rubella is much less common now. Almost everyone who receives the vaccine has immunity to rubella. Immunity means that your body has built a defense to the rubella virus. In some adults, the vaccine may wear off. This means they are not fully protected. Women who may become pregnant and other adults may receive a booster shot. Children and adults who were never vaccinated against rubella may still get this infection. Symptoms 
 
 Children generally have few symptoms. Adults may have a fever, headache, general discomfort ( malaise ), and a runny nose before the rash appears. They may not notice the symptoms. Other symptoms may include: Bruising (rare) Inflammation of the eyes (bloodshot eyes) Muscle or joint pain  Exams and Tests 
 
 A nasal or throat swab may be sent for culture. A blood test can be done to see if a person is protected against rubella. All women who may become pregnant should have this test. If the test is negative, they will receive the vaccine. Treatment 
 
 There is no treatment for this disease. Taking acetaminophen can help reduce fever.  Defects that occur with congenital rubella syndrome can be treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Rubella is most often a mild infection. After an infection, people have immunity to the disease for the rest of their lives. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can occur in the unborn baby if the mother becomes infected during pregnancy. A  miscarriage  or  stillbirth  may occur. The child may be born with birth defects.  When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if: You are a woman of childbearing age and are unsure of whether you have been vaccinated against rubella You or your child develop a severe headache, stiff neck, earache, or vision problems during or after a case of rubella You or your child need to receive MMR immunization (vaccine)  Prevention 
 
 There is a safe and effective vaccine to prevent rubella. The rubella vaccine is recommended for all children. It is routinely given when children are 12 to 15 months old, but is sometimes given earlier during epidemics. A second vaccination (booster) is routinely given to children ages 4 to 6. MMR is a combination vaccine that protects against  measles ,  mumps , and rubella. Women of childbearing age most often have a blood test to see if they have immunity to rubella. If they are not immune, women should avoid getting pregnant for 28 days after receiving the vaccine. Those who should not get vaccinated include: Women who are pregnant Anyone whose immune system is affected by cancer, corticosteroid medications, or radiation treatment.  Great care is taken not to give the vaccine to a woman who is already pregnant. However, in the rare instances when pregnant women have been vaccinated, no problems have been detected in the infants. Alternative Names 
 
 Three day measles; German measles Images 
 
 
 Rubella on an infant's back 
 Rubella 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Recommended Immunization Schedules for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 years and Adults Aged 19 Years and Older -- United States, 2014.  MMWR . 2014;63(5):108-9. PMID: 24500290  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24500290 .  Coonrod DV, Jack BW, Boggess KA. The clinical content of preconception care: immunizations as part of preconception care.  Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2008;199(6 Suppl 2):S290-5. PMID: 19081423  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19081423 .  Weisberg SS. Vaccine preventable diseases: current perspectives in historical context.  Dis Mon . 2007;53(10):467-528. PMID: 18005790  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18005790 .  Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Cataract - adult 
 Congenital heart disease 
 Congenital rubella 
 Ear infection - acute 
 Encephalitis 
 Hearing loss 
 Immune response 
 Intellectual disability 
 Measles 
 Microcephaly 
 Miscarriage 
 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rubella 
 Browse the Encyclopedia