
 Sarcoidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sarcoidosis is a disease in which inflammation occurs in the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, eyes, skin, or other tissues. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of sarcoidosis is unknown. What is known is that when a person has the disease, tiny clumps of abnormal tissue (granulomas) form in certain organs of the body. Granulomas are clusters of immune cells. The disease can affect almost any organ. It most commonly affects the lungs. Doctors think that having certain genes makes it more likely for a person to develop sarcoidosis. Things that may trigger the disease include infections with bacteria or viruses. Contact with dust or chemicals may also be triggers. The disease is more common in African Americans and Caucasians of Scandinavian heritage. More women than men have the disease. The disease often begins between ages 20 and 40. Sarcoidosis is rare in young children. A person with a close blood relative who has sarcoidosis is nearly five times as likely to develop the condition. Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they can involve almost any body part or organ system. Almost all people affected by sarcoidosis have lung or chest symptoms: Chest pain (most often behind the breast bone) Dry  cough Shortness of breath Coughing up blood (rare, but serious) Symptoms of general discomfort: Fatigue Fever Joint ache or pain (arthralgia) Weight loss Skin symptoms: Hair loss Raised, red, firm skin sores ( erythema nodosum ), almost always on the front part of the lower legs Rash Scars that become raised or inflamed Nervous system symptoms may include: Headache Seizures Weakness on one side of the face Eye symptoms include: Burning Discharge from the eye Dry eyes Itching Pain Vision loss Other symptoms of this disease: Dry mouth Fainting spells, if the heart is involved Nosebleed Swelling in the upper part of the abdomen Liver disease Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show the following: Abnormal breath sounds (such as rales) Enlarged liver Enlarged lymph glands Enlarged spleen Rash Eye inflammation (specialized eye exam is needed) The disease is often found in people without visible physical signs who have an abnormal chest x-ray. Different imaging tests may help diagnose sarcoidosis: Chest x-ray  to see if the lungs are involved or lymph nodes are enlarged CT scan  of the chest Lung gallium scan Imaging tests of the  brain  and  liver Echocardiogram of the heart To diagnose this condition, a biopsy is needed. Biopsy of the lung using  bronchoscopy  is usually done. Biopsies of other body tissues may also be done. The following lab tests may be done: Calcium levels ( urine ,  ionized ,  serum ) CBC Immunoelectrophoresis -- serum Liver function tests Quantitative immunoglobulins (nephelometry) Serum phosphorus Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) Treatment 
 
 Sarcoidosis symptoms will often get better without treatment. If the eyes, heart, nervous system, or lungs are affected, corticosteroid medicine is usually prescribed. This medicine may need to be taken for 1 to 2 years. Medicines that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressive medicines) are sometimes also needed. In rare cases, people with very severe heart or lung damage (end-stage disease) may need an organ transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many people with sarcoidosis are not seriously ill, and they get better without treatment. Up to half of all people with the disease get better in 3 years without treatment.  People whose lungs are affected may develop lung damage. Overall death rate from sarcoidosis is less than 5%. Causes of death include: Bleeding from the lung tissue Heart damage, leading to heart failure and abnormal heart rhythms Lung scarring (pulmonary fibrosis) Possible Complications 
 
 Fungal lung infections ( aspergilloma ) Glaucoma  and blindness from uveitis (rare) Kidney stones from high calcium levels in blood or urine Osteoporosis  and other complications of taking corticosteroids for long periods of time  
 High blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs ( pulmonary hypertension ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider promptly if you have: Difficulty breathing Palpitations Vision changes  Other symptoms of this disorder Images 
 
 
 Sarcoid, stage I - chest x-ray 
 Sarcoid, stage II - chest x-ray 
 Sarcoid, stage IV - chest x-ray 
 Sarcoid - close-up of the skin lesions 
 Erythema nodosum associated with sarcoidosis 
 Sarcoidosis - close-up 
 Sarcoidosis on the elbow 
 Sarcoidosis on the nose and forehead 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Judson MA, Morgenthau AS, Baughman RP. Sarcoidosis. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 66. Valeyre D, Prasse A, Nunes H, Uzunhan Y, Brillet PY, Müller-Quernheim J. Sarcoidosis.  Lancet . 2014; 383(9923):1155-1167. PMID: 24090799  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24090799 . Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Glaucoma 
 Interstitial lung disease 
 Peripheral 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Uveitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia