
 Satiety - early   
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Satiety is the satisfied feeling of being full after eating. Early satiety is feeling full sooner than normal or after eating less than usual. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Gastric outlet obstruction Heartburn Nervous system problem that causes delayed stomach emptying Stomach or abdominal tumor Stomach (peptic) ulcer Home Care 
 
 Follow your health care provider's advice.  A liquid diet may be helpful.  You may need to keep a detailed diet log. This is a place where you write down what you eat, how much, and when. You may be comfortable if you eat small, frequent meals rather than big meals.  A diet high in fat or high in fiber may worsen the feeling. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: The feeling lasts for days to weeks and does not get better. You lose weight without trying. You have dark stools. You have nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, or bloating. You have fever and chills.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions such as: When did this symptom begin? How long does each episode last? What foods, if any, make the symptoms worse? What other symptoms do you have (for example, vomiting, excessive gas, abdominal pain, or weight loss)? Tests that may be performed include: Complete blood count  and  blood differential  to check for anemia Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) Stool tests for bleeding X-rays studies of the stomach, esophagus, and small intestine (abdominal x-ray and an  upper GI and small bowel series ) Stomach-emptying studies Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal fullness prematurely after meals Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Tack J. Dyspepsia. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 14. 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia