
 Sciatica 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sciatica refers to pain, weakness, numbness, or tingling in the leg. It is caused by injury to or pressure on the sciatic nerve. Sciatica is a symptom of a medical problem. It is not a medical condition on its own. Causes 
 
 Sciatica occurs when there is pressure or damage to the sciatic nerve. This nerve starts in the lower back and runs down the back of each leg. This nerve controls the muscles of the back of the knee and lower leg. It also provides sensation to the back of the thigh, part of the lower leg, and the sole of the foot. Common causes of sciatica include: Slipped disk Spinal stenosis Piriformis syndrome (a pain disorder involving the narrow muscle in the buttocks) Pelvic injury or fracture Tumors Men between 30 and 50 years of age are more likely to have sciatica. Symptoms 
 
 Sciatica pain can vary widely. It may feel like a mild tingling, dull ache, or burning sensation. In some cases, the pain is severe enough to make a person unable to move. The pain most often occurs on one side. Some people have sharp pain in one part of the leg or hip and numbness in other parts. The pain or numbness may also be felt on the back of the calf or on the sole of the foot. The affected leg may feel weak. Sometimes, your foot gets caught on the ground when walking. The pain may start slowly. It may get worse: After standing or sitting During certain times of the day, such as at night When sneezing, coughing, or laughing When bending backward or walking more than a few yards or meters, especially if caused by spinal stenosis Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Weakness when bending the knee Difficulty bending the foot inward or down Difficulty walking on your toes Difficulty bending forward or backward Abnormal or weak reflexes Loss of sensation or numbness Pain when lifting the leg straight up when you're lying on the exam table Tests are often not needed unless pain is severe or long-lasting. If tests are ordered, they may include: Blood tests X-ray,  MRI , or other imaging tests Treatment 
 
 As sciatica is a symptom of another medical condition, the underlying cause should be identified and treated. In some cases, no treatment is required and recovery occurs on its own. Conservative (non-surgical) treatment is best in many cases. Your provider may recommend the following steps to calm your symptoms and reduce inflammation: Apply heat or ice to the painful area. Try ice for the first 48 to 72 hours, then use heat. Take over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB) or acetaminophen (Tylenol). Measures to  take care of your back at home  may include: Bed rest is not recommended.  Reduce your activity for the first couple of days. Then, slowly start your usual activities.  DO NOT do heavy lifting or twisting of your back for the first 6 weeks after the pain begins.  Start exercising again after 2 to 3 weeks. Include exercises to strengthen your abdominal (core) muscles and improve flexibility of your spine. Your provider may also suggest physical therapy. Additional treatments depend on the condition that is causing the sciatica. If these measures do not help, your provider may recommend  injections  of certain medicines to reduce swelling around the nerve. Other medicines may be prescribed to help reduce the stabbing pains due to nerve irritation. Nerve pain is very difficult to treat. If you have ongoing problems with pain, you may want to see a neurologist or a pain specialist to ensure that you have access to the widest range of treatment options. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Often, sciatica gets better on its own. But it is common for it to return.  Possible Complications 
 
 More serious complications depend on the cause of sciatica, such as  slipped disk  or  spinal stenosis . Sciatica can lead to permanent numbness or weakness of your leg. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if you have: Unexplained fever with back pain Back pain after a severe blow or fall Redness or swelling on the back or spine Pain traveling down your legs below the knee Weakness or numbness in your buttocks, thigh, leg, or pelvis Burning with urination or blood in your urine Pain that is worse when you lie down, or awakens you at night Severe pain and you cannot get comfortable Loss of control of urine or stool (incontinence) Also call if: You have been losing weight unintentionally (not on purpose) You use steroids or intravenous drugs You have had back pain before, but this episode is different and feels worse This episode of back pain has lasted longer than 4 weeks Prevention 
 
 Prevention varies, depending on the cause of the nerve damage. Avoid prolonged sitting or lying with pressure on the buttocks. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - sciatic nerve; Sciatic nerve dysfunction; Low back pain - sciatica; LBP - sciatica; Lumbar radiculopathy - sciatica Images 
 
 
 Sciatic nerve 
 Cauda equina 
 Sciatic nerve damage 
 References 
 
 Kim DH, Hudson AR, Kline DG. Sciatic nerve. In: Kim DH, Hudson AR, Kline DG, eds.  Atlas of Peripheral Nerve Surgery . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 16. Marques DR, Carroll WE. Neurology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. Ropper AH, Zafonte RD. Sciatica.  N Engl J Med . 2015;372(13):1240-1248. PMID: 25806916  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25806916 . Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Broken bone 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 Cuts and puncture wounds 
 Diskectomy 
 Foraminotomy 
 Laminectomy 
 Low back pain - acute 
 Low back pain - chronic 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Spinal fusion 
 Tibial nerve dysfunction 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Spine surgery - discharge 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sciatica 
 Browse the Encyclopedia