
 Sclerosing cholangitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sclerosing cholangitis refers to swelling (inflammation), scarring, and destruction of the  bile  ducts inside and outside of the liver. Causes 
 
 The cause of this condition is usually unknown. The disease may be seen in people who have: Autoimmune disorders Chronic pancreatitis  (inflamed pancreas) Inflammatory bowel disease ( Crohn disease  and  ulcerative colitis ) Sarcoidosis  (a disease that causes inflammation in various parts of the body) Genetic factors may also be responsible. Sclerosing cholangitis occurs more often in men than women. This disorder is rare in children. Sclerosing cholangitis may also be caused by: Choledocholithiasis  (gallstones in the bile duct) Infections in the liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts Symptoms 
 
 The first symptoms are usually: Fatigue Itching Yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)  However, some people have no symptoms. Other symptoms may include: Enlarged liver Enlarged spleen Loss of appetite and weight loss Repeat episodes of  cholangitis Exams and Tests 
 
 Even though some people do not have symptoms, blood tests shows that they have abnormal liver function. Your health care provider will look for: Diseases that cause similar problems Diseases that often occur with this condition (especially inflammatory bowel disease) Gallstones Tests that show cholangitis include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP) Liver biopsy Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram ( PTC ) Blood tests include liver enzymes ( liver function tests ). Treatment 
 
 Medicines that may be used include: Cholestyramine (such as Prevalite) to treat itching Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol) to improve liver function Fat-soluble vitamins (D, E, A, K) to replace what is lost from the disease itself Antibiotics to treat infections in the bile ducts Medicines to quiet the immune system (such as prednisone, azathioprine, cyclosporine, or methotrexate) These surgical procedures may be done: Inserting a long, thin tube with a balloon at the end to open up narrowing ( endoscopic  balloon dilation of strictures) Placement of a drain or tube for major narrowing (strictures) of bile ducts Proctocolectomy  (removal of colon and rectum, for those who have both ulcerative colitis and sclerosing cholangitis) Liver transplant Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well people do varies. The disease tends to get worse over time, and sometimes people develop: Ascites  (buildup of fluid in the space between the lining of the abdomen and abdominal organs) and  varices  (enlarged veins) Biliary  cirrhosis  (inflammation of the bile ducts) Liver failure Persistent jaundice Some people develop infections of the bile ducts that keep returning. People with this condition have an increased risk of developing cancer of the bile ducts (cholangiocarcinoma). They should be checked regularly with a liver imaging test and blood tests. People who also have inflammatory bowel disease may have an increased risk of developing cancer of the colon or rectum and should have periodic colonoscopy. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding esophageal varices Cancer in the bile ducts ( cholangiocarcinoma ) Cirrhosis  and liver failure Infection of the biliary system (cholangitis) Narrowing of the bile ducts Vitamin deficiencies  Alternative Names 
 
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis; PSC  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Gordon FD. Primary sclerosing cholangitis.  Surg Clin North Am . 2008;88:1385-407. Ross AS, Kowdley KV. Sclerosing cholangitis and recurrent pyogenic cholangitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 68. Sabbaghian S, Ahrendt SA. Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:409-13. Wang C, Pressman A. Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015 . 1st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:section I. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Biliary system 
 Cirrhosis 
 Crohn disease 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia