
 Scorpions 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article describes the effects of a scorpion sting. This article for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage a scorpion sting. If you or someone you are with is stung, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Scorpion venom contains the poison. Where Found 
 
 This venom is found in scorpions and related species. Scorpion stings kill more people around the world than any other animal, except snakes (from snake bites). However, most varieties of North American scorpions are NOT poisonous. The poisonous ones in the United States live mainly in the southwestern deserts.  Symptoms 
 
 In mild cases, the only symptom may be a mild  tingling  or burning at the site of the sting. In severe cases, symptoms in different parts of the body may include: Eyes and ears Double vision  Lungs Difficulty breathing No breathing Rapid breathing  Nose, mouth, and throat Drooling Spasm of the larynx (voice box) Tongue that feels thick  Heart and blood Increased or decreased  heart rate Irregular heartbeat Kidneys and bladder Inability to hold in urine Decreased urine output Muscles and joints Muscle spasms Nervous system Convulsions Paralysis Random movements of the head, eye, or neck Restlessness Seizures Stiffness  Stomach and intestinal tract Abdominal cramps Inability to hold in stool Home Care 
 
 Most stings from North American scorpions do not need treatment. Children 6 years and younger are more likely to have harmful effects from poisonous types of scorpions. Keep the person and the area of the sting still. Place ice (wrapped in a clean cloth) on the site of the sting for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has problems with blood circulation, reduce the time the ice is on the skin to prevent possible skin damage. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition Exact type of scorpion, if possible The time of the sting Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the insect with you to the hospital, if possible. Make sure it is in a tightly closed container. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The wound and symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicine to reverse the effect of the venom Medicine to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Death from scorpion stings rarely occurs in people older than 6 years. If symptoms rapidly become worse within the first 2 to 4 hours after the sting, a poor outcome is more likely. Symptoms may last several days or longer. Some deaths have occurred as late as weeks after the sting if complications develop. References 
 
 Nogar JN, Clark RF. Arthropod bites and stings. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 140. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. Steen CJ, Schwartz RA. Arthropod bites and stings. In: Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al., eds.  Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine . 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008:chap 210. Suchard J. Scorpion envenomation. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 53. 
 Review Date 7/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia