
 Scrotal ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Scrotal  ultrasound  is an imaging test that looks at the scrotum. It is the flesh-covered sac that hangs between the legs at the base of the penis and contains the testicles. The testicles are the male reproductive organs that produce sperm and the hormone  testosterone . They are located in the  scrotum , along with other small organs, blood vessels, and a small tube called the vas deferens. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You lie on your back with your legs spread. The health care provider drapes a cloth across your thighs under the scrotum or applies wide strips of adhesive tape to the area. The scrotal sac will be slightly raised with the testicles lying side by side. A clear gel is applied to the scrotal sac to help transmit the sound waves. A handheld probe (the ultrasound transducer) is then moved over the scrotum by the technologist. The ultrasound machine sends out high-frequency sound waves. These waves reflect off areas in the scrotum to create a picture. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is little discomfort. The conducting gel may feel slightly cold and wet. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A testicle ultrasound is done to:  Help determine why one or both testicles have become larger Look at a mass or lump in one or both of the testicles Find the reason for pain in the testicles Show how blood flows through the testicles  Normal Results 
 
 The testicles and other areas in the scrotum appear normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Possible causes of abnormal results include: 
   Collection of very small veins, called a  varicocele 
   Infection or  abscess 
  Noncancerous (benign)  cyst 
   Twisting of the testicle that blocks blood flow, called  testicular torsion 
   Testicular  tumor Risks 
 
 There are no known risks. You will not be exposed to radiation with this test.  Considerations 
 
 In certain cases, Doppler ultrasound may help identify blood flow inside the scrotum. This method can be helpful in cases of testicular torsion, because blood flow to the twisted testicle may be reduced. Alternative Names 
 
 Testicular ultrasound; Testicular sonogram Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Testicular ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Gilbert BR, Fulgham PF. Urinary tract imaging. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 3. Shaida N, Berman L. Male genitourinary tract. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, et al, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Cyst 
 Penis 
 Scrotum 
 Testes 
 Testosterone 
 Tumor 
 Ultrasound 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 4/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Cancer 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia