
 Scrofula 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Scrofula is a  tuberculosis  infection of the lymph nodes in the neck. Causes 
 
 Scrofula is most often caused by the bacteria  Mycobacterium tuberculosis .  It is usually caused by breathing in contaminated air. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of scrofula are: Fevers (rare) Painless  swelling of lymph nodes  in the neck and other areas of the body Sores (rare) Sweats  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to diagnose scrofula include: Biopsy of affected tissue Chest x-rays CT scan of the neck Cultures to check for the bacteria in tissue samples taken from the lymph nodes HIV blood test PPD test  (also called TB test) Other tests for tuberculosis (TB)  Treatment 
 
 When infection is caused by  Mycobacterium tuberculosis , treatment usually involves 9 to 12 months of antibiotics. Several antibiotics need to be used at once. Common antibiotics for scrofula include: Ethambutol Isoniazid (INH) Pyrazinamide Rifampin  When infection is caused by another type of mycobacteria (which often occurs in children), treatment usually involves antibiotics such as:  Rifampin Ethambutol Clarithromycin  Surgery is sometimes used first. It may also be used if the medicines are not working. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, people usually make a complete recovery. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur from this infection: Draining sore in the neck Scarring  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child has a swelling or group of swellings in the neck. Scrofula can occur in children who have not been exposed to someone with tuberculosis. Prevention 
 
 People who have been exposed to someone with tuberculosis of the lungs should have a PPD test. Alternative Names 
 
 Tuberculous adenitis References 
 
 Ellner JJ. Tuberculosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 332. Fitzgerald DW, Sterling TR, Haas DW. Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 251. Read More 
 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia