
 Scrotal masses 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A scrotal mass is a lump or bulge that can be felt in the scrotum. The scrotum is the sac that contains the testicles. Causes 
 
 A scrotal mass can be noncancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant). Benign scrotal masses include: Hematocele -- blood collection in the scrotum Hydrocele  -- fluid collection in the scrotum Spermatocele -- a cyst-like growth in the scrotum that contains fluid and dead sperm cells Varicocele  -- a varicose vein along the spermatic cord Epididymal cyst -- a swelling in the duct behind the testes that transports sperm Scrotal masses can be caused by: Abnormal bulge in the groin ( inguinal hernia ) Diseases such as  epididymitis Injury to the scrotum Testicular torsion Tumors Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Enlarged scrotum Painless or painful  testicle lump Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider may feel a growth in the scrotum. This growth may: Feel tender Be smooth, twisted, or irregular Feel liquid, firm, or solid Be only on one side of the body  The inguinal lymph nodes in the groin on the same side as the growth may be enlarged or tender. The following tests may be done: Biopsy Ultrasound  of the scrotum Treatment 
 
 A provider should evaluate all scrotal masses. However, many types of masses are harmless and do not need to be treated unless you are having symptoms. In some cases, the condition may improve with  self-care , antibiotics, or pain relievers. You need to get medical attention right away for a growth in the scrotum that is painful. If the scrotal mass is part of the testicle, it has a higher risk of being cancerous. Surgery may be needed to remove the testicle if this is the case.  A jock strap scrotal support may help relieve the pain or discomfort from the scrotal mass. A hematocele, hydrocele, or spermatocele may sometimes need surgery to remove the collection of blood, fluid, or dead cells. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most conditions that cause scrotal masses can be easily treated. Even testicular cancer has a high cure rate if found and treated early.  Have your provider examine any scrotal growth as soon as possible. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the cause of the scrotal mass. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you find a lump or bulge in your scrotum. Any new growth in the testicle or scrotum needs to be checked by your provider to determine if it may be testicular cancer. Prevention 
 
 You can prevent scrotal masses caused by sexually transmitted diseases by practicing safe sex. To prevent scrotal masses caused by injury, wear an athletic cup during exercise. Alternative Names 
 
 Testicular mass; Scrotal growth Images 
 
 
 Hydrocele 
 Spermatocele 
 Male reproductive system 
 Scrotal mass 
 References 
 
 Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testes and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132. Montgomery JS, Bloom DA. The diagnosis and management of scrotal masses.  Med Clin North Am . 2011;95:235-244. PMID: 21095426  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21095426 . U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Testicular Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2011;154:483-486. PMID: 21464350  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21464350 . Wampler SM, Llanes M. Common scrotal and testicular problems.  Prim Care . 2010;37:613-626. PMID: 20705202  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20705202 . Read More 
 
 Epididymitis 
 Hernia 
 Hydrocele 
 Orchitis 
 Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor 
 Testicular cancer 
 Varicocele 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia