
 Seborrheic dermatitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Seborrheic dermatitis is a common, inflammatory skin condition that causes flaky, white to yellowish  scales  to form on oily areas such as the scalp, face or inside the ear. It can occur with or without reddened skin. Cradle cap  is the term used when seborrheic dermatitis affects the scalp of infants. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of seborrheic dermatitis is unknown. Doctors think it may be due to a combination hormone levels, weakened immune system, lack of certain nutrients, or nervous system problems. Irritation from a yeast called  Malassezia  may also lead to this condition. Seborrheic dermatitis appears to run in families.  Risk factors include: Stress or fatigue  Weather extremes Oily skin, or skin problems such as acne Infrequent shampoos or skin cleaning Using lotions that contain alcohol Obesity Neurologic conditions, including  Parkinson disease ,  head injury  or  stroke Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Symptoms 
 
 Seborrheic dermatitis can occur on different body areas. Usually, it forms where the skin is oily or greasy. Common areas include the scalp, eyebrows, eyelids, creases of the nose, lips, behind the ears, in the outer ear, and middle of the chest. In general, symptoms of seborrheic dermatitis include: Skin lesions  with scales 
  Plaques  over large area Greasy, oily areas of skin Skin scales -- white and flaking, or yellowish, oily, and sticky dandruff Itching -- may become more itchy if infected Mild redness Hair loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Diagnosis is based on appearance and location of the skin lesions. Further tests, such as  skin biopsy , are rarely needed. Treatment 
 
 Flaking and dryness can be treated with over-the-counter dandruff or medicated shampoos. You can buy these at the drugstore without a prescription. Look for a product that says on the label it treats seborrheic dermatitis. Such products contain ingredients such as salicylic acid, coal tar, zinc, resorcin, ketoconazole, or selenium sulfide. Use the shampoo according to label instructions. For severe cases, your healthcare provider will likely prescribe a shampoo or lotion containing a stronger dose of selenium sulfide, ketoconazole, cicloprox, sodium sulfacetamide, or corticosteroid. A cream that contains an immunomodulator, such as tacrolimus or pimecrolimus, may be prescribed. This medicine suppresses the immune system to treat inflammation.  It is thought that sunlight improves seborrheic dermatitis. In some persons, the condition gets better in the summer, especially after outdoor activities. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic (life-long) condition that comes and goes and can be controlled with treatment.  Severity of seborrheic dermatitis can be lessened by controlling risk factors and paying careful attention to skin care.  Possible Complications 
 
 The condition may result in: Psychological distress, low self-esteem, embarrassment Secondary bacterial or fungal infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if seborrheic dermatitis symptoms do not respond to self-care or over-the-counter treatments. Also call if patches of seborrheic dermatitis drain fluid or pus, form crusts, or become very red or painful.  Prevention 
 
 The severity of seborrheic dermatitis can be lessened by controlling the risk factors and by paying careful attention to skin care. Alternative Names 
 
 Dandruff; Seborrheic eczema; Cradle cap Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Weidman AK, Williams JDL, Coulson I. Seborrheic eczema. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 219. Read More 
 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Parkinson disease 
 Scales 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dandruff, Cradle Cap, and Other Scalp Conditions 
 Eczema 
 Browse the Encyclopedia