
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis is a disorder in which abnormal proteins build up in tissues and organs. Clumps of the abnormal proteins are called amyloid deposits. Secondary means it occurs because of another disease or situation. For example, this condition usually occurs as a result of  chronic  infection or chronic inflammatory disease. Primary amyloidosis means there is no disease that is causing the condition. Systemic means that the disease affects the entire body. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of  amyloidosis  is unknown. You are more likely to develop secondary systemic amyloidosis if you have a long-term infection or inflammation. This condition may occur with: Ankylosing spondylitis Bronchiectasis Chronic  osteomyelitis Cystic fibrosis Familial Mediterranean fever Hairy cell leukemia Hodgkin disease Juvenile chronic arthritis Kidney dialysis Multiple myeloma Reiter syndrome Rheumatoid arthritis Sjogren syndrome Systemic lupus erythematosus Tuberculosis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of secondary systemic amyloidosis depend on which body tissue is affected by the protein deposits. These deposits damage normal tissues, leading to the symptoms or signs of this illness: Bleeding in the skin Fatigue Irregular heartbeat Numbness  of hands and feet Rash Shortness of breath Swallowing difficulties Swollen arms or legs Swollen tongue Weak hand grip Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Abdominal ultrasound  (may show a swollen liver or spleen) Biopsy or  aspiration  of fat just beneath the skin (subcutaneous fat) Biopsy of rectum Biopsy of skin Biopsy of bone marrow Blood tests, including  creatinine  and  BUN Echocardiogram Electrocardiogram ( ECG ) Nerve conduction velocity Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 The condition that is causing the amyloidosis should be treated. In some cases, the drug colchicine or a biologic drug (medicine that treats the immune system) is prescribed.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on which organs are affected and whether the disease that is causing it can be controlled. If the disease involves the heart and kidneys, it may lead to organ failure and death. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from secondary systemic amyloidosis include: Endocrine  failure Heart failure Kidney failure Respiratory  failure  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of this condition. The following are serious symptoms that need prompt medical attention: Bleeding Irregular heartbeat Numbness Shortness of breath Swelling Weak grip Prevention 
 
 If you have a disease that is known to increase your risk for this condition, make sure you get it treated. This may help prevent amyloidosis.  Alternative Names 
 
 Amyloidosis - secondary systemic Images 
 
 
 Amyloidosis on the fingers 
 Amyloidosis on the face 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Gertz MA. Amyloidosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 188. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Ankylosing spondylitis 
 Bronchiectasis 
 Chronic 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hairy cell leukemia 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Reactive arthritis 
 Respiratory 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amyloidosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia