
 Sensitivity analysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sensitivity analysis determines the effectiveness of antibiotics against microorganisms (germs) such as bacteria that have been isolated from cultures. Sensitivity analysis may be done along with: Blood culture Clean catch  urine culture or  catheterized specimen  urine culture Sputum culture Culture from endocervix Throat culture Wound and other cultures  How the Test is Performed 
 
 After the culture (sample) is collected from you, it is sent to a lab. There, the samples are put in special containers to grow the microorganisms (germs) from the collected samples. Colonies of microorganisms are combined with different antibiotics to see how well each antibiotic stops each colony from growing. The test determines how effective each antibiotic is against a given organism. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Follow your health care provider's instructions on how to prepare for the method used to obtain the culture. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 The way the test feels depends on the method used to obtain the culture. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test shows which antibiotic drugs should be used to treat an infection. Many organisms are resistant to certain antibiotics. Sensitivity tests are important in helping find the right antibiotic for you. Your provider may start you on one antibiotic, but later change you to another because of the results of sensitivity analysis. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If the organism shows resistance to the antibiotics used in the test, those antibiotics will not be effective treatment. Risks 
 
 Risks depend on the method used to obtain the specific culture. Alternative Names 
 
 Antibiotic sensitivity testing; Antimicrobial susceptibility testing References 
 
 Smith MB, LaSala PR, Woods GL. In vitro testing of antimicrobial agents. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Blood culture 
 Endocervical culture 
 Routine sputum culture 
 Throat swab culture 
 Urine culture 
 Urine culture - catheterized specimen 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Antibiotics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia