
 Sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sensorimotor polyneuropathy is a condition that causes a decreased ability to move or feel (sensation) because of nerve damage. Causes 
 
 Neuropathy means a disease of, or damage to nerves. When it occurs outside of the brain or spinal cord, it is called a peripheral neuropathy. Mononeuropathy means one nerve is involved. Polyneuropathy means that many nerves in different parts of the body are involved. Neuropathy can affect nerves that provide feeling (sensory neuropathy) or cause movement (motor neuropathy). It can also affect both, in which case it is called a sensorimotor neuropathy. Sensorimotor polyneuropathy is a bodywide (systemic) process that damages nerve cells, nerve fibers (axons), and nerve coverings ( myelin  sheath). Damage to the covering of the nerve cell causes nerve signals to slow or stop. Damage to the nerve fiber or entire nerve cell can make the nerve stop working. Some neuropathies develop over years, while others can start and get severe within hours to days. Nerve damage can be caused by: Autoimmune (when the body attacks itself) disorders Conditions that put pressure on nerves Decreased blood flow to the nerve Diseases that destroy the glue (connective tissue) that holds cells and tissues together Swelling (inflammation) of the nerves  Some diseases lead to polyneuropathy that is mainly sensory or mainly motor. Possible causes of sensorimotor polyneuropathy include: Alcoholic neuropathy Cancer (called a paraneoplastic neuropathy) Chronic inflammatory neuropathy Diabetic neuropathy Drug-related neuropathy , including chemotherapy Guillain-Barré syndrome Hereditary neuropathy Vitamin deficiency ( vitamins B12 ,  B1 , and E)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Decreased feeling in any area of the body Difficulty swallowing or breathing Difficulty using the arms or hands Difficulty using the legs or feet Difficulty walking Pain, burning, tingling, or abnormal feeling in any area of the body (called  neuralgia ) Weakness of the face, arms, or legs, or any area of the body  Symptoms may develop quickly (as in Guillain-Barré syndrome) or slowly over weeks to years. Symptoms usually occur on both sides of the body. Most often, they start at the ends of the toes first. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. An exam may show: Decreased feeling (may affect touch, pain, vibration, or position sensation) Diminished reflexes (most commonly the ankle) Muscle atrophy Muscle twitches Muscle weakness Paralysis Tests may include: Biopsy Blood tests Electrical test of the muscles ( EMG ) Electrical test of  nerve conduction X-rays or other imaging tests Treatment 
 
 Goals of treatment include: Finding the cause Controlling the symptoms Promoting a person's self-care and independence Depending on the cause, treatment may include: Changing medicines, if they are causing the problem Controlling blood sugar level, when the neuropathy is from diabetes Not drinking alcohol Taking daily nutritional supplements Medicines to treat the underlying cause of the polyneuropathy PROMOTING SELF-CARE AND INDEPENDENCE Exercises and retraining to maximize function of the damaged nerves Job (vocational) therapy Occupational therapy Orthopedic treatments Physical therapy Wheelchairs, braces, or splints CONTROL OF SYMPTOMS Safety is important for people with neuropathy. Lack of muscle control and decreased sensation can increase the risk of falls or other injuries. If you have movement difficulties, these measures can help keep you safe: Leave lights on. Remove obstacles (such as loose rugs that may slip on the floor). Test water temperature before bathing. Use railings. Wear protective shoes (such as those with closed toes and low heels). Wear shoes that have non-slippery soles. Other tips include: Check your feet (or other affected area) daily for bruises, open skin areas, or other injuries, which you may not notice and can become infected. Check the inside of shoes often for grit or rough spots that may injure your feet. Visit a foot doctor (podiatrist) to assess and reduce the risk of injury to your feet. Avoid leaning on your elbows, crossing your knees, or being in other positions that put prolonged pressure on certain body areas. Medicines used to treat this condition: Over-the-counter and prescription pain relievers to reduce stabbing pain ( neuralgia ) Anticonvulsants or antidepressants Lotions, creams, or medicated patches Use pain medicine only when necessary. Keeping your body in the proper position or keeping bed linens off a tender body part may help control pain. Support Groups 
 
 These groups can provide more information about neuropathy. Neuropathy Action Foundation:  www.neuropathyaction.org The Foundation for Peripherial Neuropathy:  www.foundationforpn.org/ Neuropathy Support Network:  www.neuropathysupportnetwork.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In some cases, you can fully recover from peripheral neuropathy if your provider can find the cause and successfully treat it, and if the damage does not affect the entire nerve cell. The amount of disability varies. Some people have no disability. Others have partial or complete loss of movement, function, or feeling. Nerve pain may be uncomfortable and may last for a long time. In some cases, sensorimotor polyneuropathy causes severe, life-threatening symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result include: Deformity Injury to feet (caused by bad shoes or hot water when stepping into the bathtub) Numbness Pain Trouble walking Weakness Difficulty breathing or swallowing (in severe cases)
    When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have loss of movement or feeling in a part of your body. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of controlling the symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Polyneuropathy - sensorimotor Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Nervous system 
 References 
 
 Hurley RW, Henriquez OH, Wu CL. Neuropathic pain syndromes. In: Benzon HT, Rathmell JP, Wu CL, Turk DC, Argoff CE, Hurley RW, eds.  Practical Management of Pain . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 24. Katitji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Ralph JW, Aminoff MJ. Neuromuscular complications of general medical disorders. In: Aminoff MJ, ed.  Aminoff's Neurology and General Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Chronic 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Myelin 
 Neuropathy secondary to drugs 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia