
 Septoplasty 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Septoplasty is surgery performed to correct any problems in the nasal septum, the structure inside the nose that separates the nose into two chambers. Description 
 
 Most people receive  general anesthesia  for septoplasty. This will make you asleep and pain-free. Some people have the surgery under local anesthesia, which numbs the area to block pain. You will stay awake if you have local anesthesia. Surgery takes about 1 to 1 ½ hours. Most people go home the same day. To do the procedure: The surgeon makes a cut inside the wall on one side of your nose. The  mucous membrane  that covers the wall is elevated. Cartilage or bone that is causing the blockage in the area is moved, repositioned or taken out. The mucous membrane is put back in place. The membrane will be held in place by stitches, splints, or packing material.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 The main reasons for this surgery are: To repair a crooked, bent, or deformed nasal septum that blocks the airway in the nose. People with this condition very often breathe through their mouth and may be more likely to get nasal or sinus infections. To treat  nosebleeds  that cannot be controlled.  Risks 
 
 Risks for any surgery are: Allergic reactions to medicines Breathing problems Heart problems Bleeding Infection  Risks for this surgery are: Return of the nasal blockage. This could require another surgery. Scarring A perforation, or hole, in the septum Changes in skin sensation Unevenness in the appearance of the nose Skin discoloration Before the Procedure 
 
 Before the procedure: You will meet with the doctor who will give you anesthesia during the surgery. You go over your medical history to help the doctor decide the best type of anesthesia. Be sure you tell your health care provider about any medicines you take, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. Also tell your doctor if you have any allergies or if you have a history of bleeding problems. You may need to stop taking any drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot 2 weeks before your surgery, including aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and some herbal supplements. You may be asked to stop eating and drinking after midnight the night before the procedure.  After the Procedure 
 
 After the procedure: You will most likely go home on the same day as surgery. After surgery, both sides of your nose may be packed (stuffed with cotton or spongy materials). This helps prevent nosebleeds. Most of the time this packing is removed 24 to 36 hours after surgery. You may have swelling or drainage for a few days after the surgery.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most septoplasty procedures are able to straighten the septum. Breathing often improves. Alternative Names 
 
 Nasal septum repair Images 
 
 
 Septoplasty  - series 
 References 
 
 Kridel RWH, Strum-O'Brien A. The nasal septum. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA:Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 32. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Fecal impaction 
 Headache 
 Mucosa 
 Nosebleed  
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Rhinoplasty 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Septoplasty - discharge 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Alan Lipkin, MD, otolaryngologist, private practice, Denver, CO. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia