
 Septic shock 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Septic shock is a serious condition that occurs when a body-wide infection leads to dangerously low blood pressure. Causes 
 
 Septic shock occurs most often in the very old and the very young. It may also occur in people with weakened immune systems.  Any type of bacteria can cause septic shock. Fungi and (rarely) viruses may also cause the condition. Toxins released by the bacteria or fungi may cause tissue damage. This may lead to low blood pressure and poor organ function. Some researchers think that blood clots in small arteries cause the lack of blood flow and poor organ function.  The body has a strong inflammatory response to the toxins that may contribute to organ damage. Risk factors for septic shock include: Diabetes Diseases of the genitourinary system,  biliary system , or intestinal system Diseases that weaken the immune system, such as AIDS Indwelling catheters (those that remain in place for extended periods, especially intravenous lines and urinary catheters, and plastic and metal stents used for drainage) Leukemia Long-term use of antibiotics Lymphoma Recent infection Recent surgery or medical procedure Recent use of steroid medicines Solid organ or bone marrow transplantation Symptoms 
 
 Septic shock can affect any part of the body, including the heart, brain, kidneys, liver, and intestines. Symptoms may include: Cool, pale arms and legs High or very low temperature, chills Light headedness Little or no urine Low blood pressure, especially when standing Palpitations Rapid heart rate Restlessness,  agitation , lethargy, or confusion Shortness of breath Skin rash or discoloration Decreased mental status Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests may be done to check for: Infection around the body Complete blood count (CBC)  and blood chemistry Presence of bacteria or other organisms Low blood oxygen level Disturbances in the body's acid-base balance Poor organ function or organ failure  Other tests may include: A chest x-ray to look for pneumonia or fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) A urine sample to look for infection  Additional studies, such as  blood cultures , may not become positive for several days after the blood has been taken, or for several days after the shock has developed. Treatment 
 
 Septic shock is a medical emergency. In most cases, people are admitted to the intensive care unit of the hospital. Treatment may include: Breathing machine (mechanical ventilation) Dialysis Drugs to treat low blood pressure, infection, or blood clotting Fluids given directly into a vein (intravenously) Oxygen Sedatives Surgery to drain infected areas, if needed Antibiotics The pressure in the heart and lungs may be checked. This is called hemodynamic monitoring. This can only be done with special equipment and intensive care nursing. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Septic shock has a high death rate. The death rate depends on the person's age and overall health, the cause of the infection, how many organs have failed, and how quickly and aggressively medical therapy is started. Possible Complications 
 
 Respiratory failure,  cardiac failure , or any other organ failure can occur. Gangrene may occur, possibly leading to amputation. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go directly to an emergency department if you develop symptoms of septic shock. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of bacterial infections is helpful. However, many cases of septic shock cannot be prevented. Alternative Names 
 
 Bacteremic shock; Endotoxic shock; Septicemic shock; Warm shock References 
 
 Jones E, Kline JA. Shock. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Munford RS, Suffredini AF. Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 74. Rivers EP. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Biliary system 
 Diabetes 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Meningococcemia 
 Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gangrene 
 Sepsis 
 Shock 
 Browse the Encyclopedia