
 Serum progesterone 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Serum progesterone is a test to measure the amount of progesterone in the blood. Progesterone is a hormone produced mainly in the ovaries. Progesterone plays a key role in pregnancy. It helps make a woman's uterus ready for a fertilized egg to be implanted. It also prepares the uterus for pregnancy and the breasts for milk production. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to: Determine if a woman is ovulating Evaluate a women with repeated miscarriages (other tests are used more commonly) Determine the risk of miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy early in pregnancy  Normal Results 
 
 Progesterone levels vary depending on when the test is done. Blood progesterone levels start to rise midway through the menstrual cycle. It continues to rise for about 6 to 10 days, and then falls if the egg is not fertilized. Levels continue to rise in early pregnancy. The following are normal ranges based upon certain phases of the menstrual cycle and pregnancy: Female (pre-ovulation): less than 1 nanograms per mililiter (ng/mL) or 3.18 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) Female (mid-cycle): 5 to 20 ng/mL or 15.90 to 63.60 nmol/L Male: less than 1 ng/mL or 3.18 nmol/L Postmenopausal: less than 1 ng/mL or 3.18 nmol/L Pregnancy 1st trimester: 11.2 to 90.0 ng/mL or 35.62 to 286.20 nmol/L Pregnancy 2nd trimester: 25.6 to 89.4 ng/mL or 81.41 to 284.29 nmol/L Pregnancy 3rd trimester: 48 to 150 to 300 or more ng/mL or 152.64 to 477 to 954 or more nmol/L Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Higher-than-normal levels may be due to: Pregnancy Adrenal cancer Ovarian cancer Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Lower-than-normal levels may be due to: Amenorrhea (no periods) Ectopic pregnancy Failure to ovulate Fetal death Possible miscarriage Alternative Names 
 
 Progesterone blood test (serum) References 
 
 Broekmans FJ, Fauser BCJSM. Female infertility. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al. eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Rink BR, Lockwood CJ. Recurrent pregnancy loss. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al. eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Infertility 
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test 
 Miscarriage 
 Miscarriage - threatened 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Preeclampsia 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Female Infertility 
 Health Problems in Pregnancy 
 Hormones 
 Miscarriage 
 Browse the Encyclopedia