
 Sex-linked recessive 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sex-linked diseases are passed down through families through one of the X or Y chromosomes. X and Y are sex chromosomes.  Dominant inheritance occurs when an abnormal gene from one parent causes disease even though the matching gene from the other parent is normal. The abnormal gene dominates. But in recessive inheritance, both matching genes must be abnormal to cause disease. If only one gene in the pair is abnormal, the disease does not occur or it is mild. Someone who has one abnormal gene (but no symptoms) is called a carrier. Carriers can pass abnormal genes to their children. The term "sex-linked recessive" most often refers to X-linked recessive. Information 
 
 X-linked recessive diseases most often occur in males. Males have only one X chromosome. A single recessive gene on that X chromosome will cause the disease. The Y chromosome is the other half of the XY gene pair in the male. However, the Y chromosome doesn't contain most of the genes of the X chromosome. Because of that, it doesn't protect the male. Diseases such as  hemophilia  and Duchenne  muscular dystrophy  occur from a recessive gene on the X chromosome. TYPICAL SCENARIOS In each pregnancy, if the mother is a carrier of a certain disease (she has only one abnormal X chromosome) and the father is not a carrier for the disease, the expected outcome is: 25% chance of a healthy boy 25% chance of a boy with disease 25% chance of a healthy girl 25% chance of a carrier girl without disease  If the father has the disease and the mother is not a carrier, the expected outcomes are:  100% chance of a healthy boy 100% chance of a carrier girl without disease  X-LINKED RECESSIVE DISORDERS IN FEMALES Females can get an X-linked recessive disorder, but this is very rare. An abnormal gene on the X chromosome from each parent would be required, since a female has two X chromosomes. This could occur in the two scenarios below. In each pregnancy, if the mother is a carrier and the father has the disease, the expected outcomes are: 25% chance of a healthy boy 25% chance of a boy with the disease 25% chance of a carrier girl 25% chance of a girl with the disease  If both the mother and the father have the disease, the expected outcomes are: 100% chance of the child having the disease, whether boy or girl  The odds of either of these two scenarios are so low that X-linked recessive diseases are sometimes referred to as male only diseases. However, this is not technically correct. Female carriers can have a normal X chromosome that is abnormally inactivated. This is called "skewed X-inactivation." These females may have symptoms similar to those of males, or they may have only mild symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Inheritance - sex-linked recessive; Genetics - sex-linked recessive; X-linked recessive Images 
 
 
 Genetics 
 References 
 
 Feero WG, Zazove P, Chen F. Clinical genomics. In: Rakel RE, Rakel D, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 43. Groden J, Gocha AS, Croce CM. Human basic genetics and patterns of inheritance. In: Creasy RK, Resnik R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ, Moore TR, Greene MF, eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 1. Korf BR. Principles of genetics. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Chromosome 
 Genes 
 Genetics 
 Sex-linked dominant 
 
 Review Date 1/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Browse the Encyclopedia