
 Shigellosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Shigellosis is an infection of the lining of the intestines. It is caused by a group of bacteria called shigella. Causes 
 
 There are several types of 
 shigella bacteria, including. Shigella sonnei , also called "group D" shigella, is responsible for most cases of shigellosis in the United States.
    Shigella flexneri , or "group B" shigella, causes almost all other cases.
    Shigella dysenteriae,  or "group A" shigella is rare in the United States, but can lead to deadly outbreaks in developing countries. People infected with the bacteria release it into their stool. They can spread the bacteria to water or food, or directly to another person. Getting just a little bit of the shigella bacteria into your mouth is enough to cause infection. Outbreaks of shigellosis are linked with poor sanitation, contaminated food and water, and crowded living conditions. Shigellosis is common among travelers in developing countries and workers or residents in refugee camps. In the United States, the condition is most commonly seen in daycare centers and places where groups of people live, such as nursing homes. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms often develop about 1 to 7 days (average 3 days) after coming into contact with the bacteria. Symptoms include: Acute (sudden)  abdominal pain  or cramping Acute fever Blood, mucus, or pus in the stool Crampy rectal pain Nausea and vomiting Watery diarrhea Exams and Tests 
 
 If you have symptoms of shigellosis, your health care provider will check for: Dehydration (not enough fluids in your body) with a fast heart rate and low blood pressure Abdominal tenderness Elevated level of white blood cells in the blood Stool culture 
  to check for white blood cells Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to replace fluids and  electrolytes  (salt and minerals) that are lost in diarrhea. Medicines that stop diarrhea are generally not given because they can cause the infection to take longer to go away. Self-care measures to avoid  dehydration  include drinking electrolyte solutions to replace the fluids lost by diarrhea. Several varieties of electrolyte solutions are available over-the-counter (without a prescription). Antibiotics can help shorten the length of the illness and help prevent it from spreading to others in group living or daycare settings. They may also be prescribed for people with severe symptoms. If you have diarrhea and cannot drink fluids by mouth because of severe nausea, you may need medical attention and  intravenous  (IV) fluids. This is especially common in small children who have shigellosis. People who take diuretics ("water pills") may need to stop taking these medicines if they have  acute  shigella enteritis. Never stop taking any medicine without first talking to your provider. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The infection is often mild and goes away on its own. Most people, except malnourished children and those with weakened immune systems, recover fully. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include:  Dehydration, severe Hemolytic-uremic syndrome  (HUS), a form of kidney failure with anemia and clotting problems Reactive arthritis About 1 in 10 children with severe shigella enteritis develop nervous system problems. These may include  febrile seizures  (also called a "fever fit") when body temperature rises quickly and the child has seizures, or a brain disease (encephalopathy) with headache,  lethargy ,  confusion , and stiff neck. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if diarrhea does not improve, if there is blood in the stool, or if there are signs of dehydration. Go to the emergency room if these symptoms occur in a person with shigellosis: Confusion Headache with stiff neck Lethargy Seizures These symptoms are most common in children. Prevention 
 
 Prevention includes properly handling, storing, and preparing food, and good personal hygiene. Handwashing is the most effective way to prevent shigellosis. Avoid food and water that may be contaminated. Alternative Names 
 
 Shigella gastroenteritis; Shigella enteritis; Enteritis - shigella; Gastroenteritis - shigella; Traveler's diarrhea - shigellosis Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Bhutta ZA. Acute gastroenteritis in children. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 340. DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis and bacterial food poisoning. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Keusch GT. Shigellosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 309. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Confusion 
 Fatigue 
 Febrile seizures 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Foodborne Illness 
 Browse the Encyclopedia