
 Shock 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Shock is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the body is not getting enough blood flow. Lack of blood flow means that the cells and organs do not get enough oxygen and nutrients to function properly. Many organs can be damaged as a result. Shock requires immediate treatment and can get worse very rapidly. As many 1 in 5 people who suffer shock will die from it.  Considerations 
 
 The main types of shock include: Cardiogenic shock  (due to heart problems) Hypovolemic shock  (caused by too little blood volume) Anaphylactic shock  (caused by allergic reaction) Septic shock  (due to infections) Neurogenic shock (caused by damage to the nervous system)  Causes 
 
 Shock can be caused by any condition that reduces blood flow, including: Heart problems (such as  heart attack  or  heart failure ) Low blood volume (as with heavy  bleeding  or  dehydration ) Changes in blood vessels (as with infection or  severe allergic reactions ) Certain medicines that significantly reduce heart function or blood pressure  Shock is often associated with heavy external or internal bleeding from a serious injury.  Spinal injuries  can also cause shock. Toxic shock syndrome  is an example of a type of shock from an infection. Symptoms 
 
 A person in shock has extremely low blood pressure. Depending on the specific cause and type of shock, symptoms will include one or more of the following: Anxiety  or agitation/restlessness Bluish lips and fingernails Chest pain Confusion Dizziness , lightheadedness, or  faintness Pale, cool, clammy skin Low or no urine output Profuse sweating , moist skin Rapid but weak pulse Shallow breathing Unconsciousness First Aid 
 
 Take the following steps if you think a person is in shock: Call 911 for immediate medical help. Check the person's airway, breathing, and circulation. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and  CPR . Even if the person is able to breathe on their own, continue to check rate of breathing at least every 5 minutes until help arrives. If the person is conscious and does NOT have an injury to the head, leg, neck, or spine, place the person in the shock position. Lay the person on the back and elevate the legs about 12 inches (30 centimeters). Do NOT elevate the head. If raising the legs will cause pain or potential harm, leave the person lying flat. Give appropriate first aid for any wounds, injuries, or illnesses. Keep the person warm and comfortable. Loosen tight clothing. IF THE PERSON VOMITS OR DROOLS Turn the head to one side to prevent choking. Do this as long as you do not suspect an injury to the spine. If a spinal injury is suspected, "log roll" the person instead. To do this, keep the person's head, neck, and back in line, and roll the body and head as a unit. DO NOT 
 
 In case of shock: Do NOT give the person anything by mouth, including anything to eat or drink. Do NOT move the person with a known or suspected  spinal injury . Do NOT wait for milder shock symptoms to worsen before calling for emergency medical help. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 any time a person has symptoms of shock. Stay with the person and follow the first aid steps until medical help arrives. Prevention 
 
 Learn ways to prevent  heart disease , falls, injuries,  dehydration , and other causes of shock. If you have a known allergy (for example, to insect bites or stings), carry an epinephrine pen. Your health care provider will teach you how and when to use it. Images 
 
 
 Shock 
 References 
 
 Jones AE, Kline JA. Shock. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Rivers EP. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Cardiogenic shock 
 Hypovolemic shock 
 Low blood pressure 
 Septic shock 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 First Aid 
 Shock 
 Browse the Encyclopedia