
 Sialogram 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sialogram is an  x-ray  of the salivary ducts and glands. The salivary glands are located on each side of the face. They release saliva into the mouth. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed in a hospital radiology department or a radiology facility. The test is done by an x-ray technician. A radiologist interprets the results. You may be given a medicine to make you calm before the procedure. You will be asked to lie on your back on the x-ray table. An x-ray is taken before the contrast material is injected to check for blockages that might prevent the contrast material from entering the ducts. A catheter (a small flexible tube) is inserted through your mouth and into the duct of the salivary gland. A special dye (contrast medium) is then injected into the duct. This allows the duct to show up on the x-ray. X-rays will be taken from several positions. The sialogram may be performed along with a CT scan. You may be given lemon juice to help you produce saliva. The x-rays are then repeated to examine the drainage of the saliva into the mouth. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the health care provider if you are: Pregnant Allergic to x-ray contrast material or any iodine substance Allergic to any drugs You must sign a consent form. You will need to rinse your mouth with germ-killing (antiseptic) solution before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel some discomfort or pressure when the contrast material is injected into the ducts. The contrast material may taste unpleasant. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A sialogram may be done when your provider thinks you might have a disorder of the salivary ducts or glands. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may suggest:  Narrowing of the salivary ducts
   Salivary gland infection  or inflammation
   Salivary duct stones Salivary duct tumor Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the potential benefits. Pregnant women should not undergo this test. Alternatives include tests like an MRI scan that do not involve x-rays. Alternative Names 
 
 Ptyalography; Sialography Images 
 
 
 Sialography 
 References 
 
 Miller-Thomas M. Diagnostic imaging and fine-needle aspiration of the salivary glands. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 84. Read More 
 
 Salivary duct stones 
 Salivary gland infections 
 Salivary gland tumors 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 2/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Alan Lipkin, MD, Otolaryngologist, private practice, Denver, CO. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Salivary Gland Cancer 
 Salivary Gland Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia