
 Sigmoidoscopy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sigmoidoscopy is a procedure used to see inside the sigmoid colon and rectum. The sigmoid colon is the area of the large intestine nearest to the rectum. How the Test is Performed 
 
 During the test: You lie on your left side with your knees drawn up to your chest. The doctor gently places a gloved and lubricated finger into your rectum to check for blockage and gently enlarge (dilate) the anus. This is called a  digital rectal exam . Next, the sigmoidoscope is placed through the anus. The scope is a flexible tube with a camera at its end. The scope is gently moved into your colon. Air is inserted into the colon to enlarge the area and help the doctor view the area better. The air may cause the urge to have a bowel movement or pass gas. Suction may be used to remove fluid or stool. The doctor may take tissue samples with a tiny  biopsy  tool inserted through the scope. Heat (electrocautery) may be used to remove  polyps . Photos of the inside of your colon may be taken.  Sigmoidoscopy using a rigid scope may be done to treat problems of the anus or rectum. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will tell you how to prepare for the exam. You will use an enema to empty your bowels. This is usually done 1 hour before the sigmoidoscopy. On the morning of the procedure, eat a light breakfast. How the Test will Feel 
 
 During the exam you may feel: Pressure during the digital rectal exam or when the scope is placed in your rectum. The need to have a bowel movement. Some bloating or cramping caused by the air or by stretching of the bowel by the sigmoidoscope.  After the test, your body will pass the air that was put into your colon.  Children may be given medicine to make them sleep lightly (sedated) for this procedure. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may recommend this test to look for the cause of: Abdominal pain Diarrhea , constipation, or other changes in bowel habits Blood, mucus, or pus in the stool Weight loss that can't be explained  This test can also be used to: Confirm findings of another test or x-rays. Screen for colorectal cancer or polyps . Take a biopsy of a growth. Normal Results 
 
 A normal test result will show no problems with the color, texture, and size of the lining of the sigmoid colon, rectal mucosa, rectum, and anus.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results can indicate: Anal fissures Anorectal abscess Blockage of the large intestine ( Hirschsprung disease ) Cancer Colorectal polyps Diverticulosis (abnormal pouches on the lining of the intestines) Hemorrhoids Inflammatory bowel disease Inflammation or infection ( proctitis )  Risks 
 
 There is a slight risk of bowel perforation (tearing a hole) and bleeding at the biopsy sites. The overall risk is very small. Alternative Names 
 
 Flexible sigmoidoscopy; Sigmoidoscopy - flexible; Proctoscopy; Proctosigmoidoscopy; Rigid sigmoidoscopy; Colon cancer sigmoidoscopy; Colorectal sigmoidoscopy; Rectal sigmoidoscopy; Gastrointestinal bleeding - sigmoidoscopy; Rectal bleeding - sigmoidoscopy; Melena - sigmoidoscopy; Blood in stool - sigmoidoscopy; Polyps - sigmoidoscopy Images 
 
 
 Colonoscopy 
 Sigmoid colon cancer, x-ray 
 Rectal biopsy 
 References 
 
 Lieberman DA, Rex DK, Winawer SJ, et al. Guidelines for colonoscopy surveillance after screening and polypectomy: a consensus update by the US Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer.  Gastroenterology . 2012;143(3):844-857. PMID: 227613141  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22763141 . Pasricha PJ. Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 134. US Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.  JAMA . 2016;315(23):2564-2575. PMID: 27304597  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27304597 . Vargo JJ. Preparation for and complications of GI endoscopy. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. Read More 
 
 Anorectal abscess 
 Colon cancer 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Crohn disease 
 Diverticulitis 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Proctitis 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonoscopy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia