
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia is inflammation of the lungs from an increase in eosinophils, a type of white blood cell. Causes 
 
 Most cases of this condition are due to an allergic reaction from: A medicine, such as a sulfonamide antibiotic or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) Infection with a fungus such as  Aspergillus fumigatus  or  Pneumocystis jirovecii A parasite, including the roundworms  Ascariasis lumbricoides ,  or  Necator americanus , or the  hookworm Ancylostoma duodenale In some cases, no cause is found. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest pain Dry  cough Fever General ill feeling Rapid  respiratory  rate Rash Shortness of breath Wheezing Symptoms can range from none at all to severe. They may go away without treatment. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen to your chest with a stethoscope. Crackle-like sounds called rales may be heard. Rales suggest inflammation of the lung tissue. A  complete blood count  (CBC) may show increased white blood cells, particularly  eosinophils . Chest x-ray  usually shows abnormal shadows called infiltrates. They may disappear with time or reappear in different areas of the lung. A  bronchoscopy  with washing may show a large number of eosinophils. A procedure that removes the stomach contents ( gastric lavage ) may show signs of the Ascaris worm or another parasite. Treatment 
 
 If you are allergic to a medicine, your provider may tell you to stop taking it. Never stop taking a medicine without first talking with your provider. If the condition is due to an infection, you may be treated with an antibiotic or anti-parasitic medicine. Sometimes, anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids are given. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease often goes away without treatment. If treatment is needed, the response is usually good. But, the disease can come back, especially if the condition does not have a specific cause and needs to be treated with corticosteroids. Possible Complications 
 
 A rare complication of simple pulmonary eosinophilia is a severe type of  pneumonia  called acute idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonia. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your provider if you have symptoms that may be linked with this disorder. Prevention 
 
 This is a rare disorder. Many times, the cause cannot be found. Minimizing exposure to possible risk factors, such as certain medicines or parasites, may reduce the chance of developing this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia; Loffler syndrome; Eosinophilic pneumonia; Pneumonia - eosinophilic Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Cottin V, Cordier JF. Eosinophilic lung diseases. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 68. Kim K, Weiss LM, Tanowitz HB. Parasitic infections. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 39.  Read More 
 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eosinophilic Disorders 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia