
 Sleepwalking 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sleepwalking is a disorder that occurs when people walk or do other activity while they are still asleep. Causes 
 
 The normal sleep cycle has stages, from light  drowsiness  to deep sleep. During the stage called rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the eyes move quickly and vivid dreaming is most common. Each night, people go through several cycles of non-REM and REM sleep.  Sleepwalking (somnambulism) most often occurs during deep, non-REM sleep (called N3 sleep) early in the night. When physical movements such as kicking, flailing, or getting out of bed occur during REM sleep, it is part of REM behavior disorder and tends to happen near morning. As people age, they have less N3 sleep. This is why sleepwalking is much more common in children and young adults. The cause of sleepwalking in children is usually unknown. Fatigue, lack of sleep, and  anxiety  are all associated with sleepwalking. In adults, sleepwalking may occur due to: Alcohol, sedatives, or other medicines, such as some sleeping pills Medical conditions, such as partial complex  seizures Mental disorders  In the elderly, sleepwalking may be a symptom of an  organic brain syndrome  or REM behavior disorders. Sleepwalking can occur at any age, but it happens most often in children ages 5 through 12. It appears to run in families. Symptoms 
 
 When people sleepwalk, they may sit up and look as though they are awake when they are actually asleep. They may get up and walk around. Or they do complex activities such as moving furniture, going to the bathroom, and dressing or undressing. Some people even drive a car while they are asleep. The episode can be very brief (a few seconds or minutes) or it can last for 30 minutes or longer. Most episodes last for less than 10 minutes. If they are not disturbed, sleepwalkers will go back to sleep. But they may fall asleep in a different or even unusual place. Symptoms of sleepwalking include: Acting confused or disoriented when the person wakes up Aggressive behavior when woken up by someone else Having a blank look on the face Opening eyes during sleep Not remembering the sleep walking episode when they wake up Performing detailed activity of any type during sleep Sitting up and appearing awake during sleep Taking in sleep and saying things that do not make sense Walking during sleep Exams and Tests 
 
 Usually, examinations and testing are not needed. If the sleepwalking occurs often, the doctor may do an exam or tests to rule out other disorders (such as partial complex seizures). If the person has a history of emotional problems, they also may need to have a mental health evaluation to look for causes such as excessive anxiety or stress. Treatment 
 
 Most people do not need specific treatment for sleepwalking. In some cases, short-acting tranquilizers are helpful in reducing sleepwalking episodes. Some people mistakenly believe that a sleepwalker should not be awakened. It is not dangerous to awaken a sleepwalker, although it is common for the person to be confused or disoriented for a short time when they wake up. Another misconception is that a person cannot be injured while sleepwalking. Sleepwalkers are commonly injured when they trip and lose their balance. Safety measures may be needed to prevent injury. This may include moving objects such as electrical cords or furniture to reduce the chance of tripping and falling. Stairways may need to be blocked with a gate. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Sleepwalking usually decreases as children get older. It usually does not indicate a serious disorder, although it can be a symptom of other disorders. It is unusual for sleepwalkers to perform activities that are dangerous. But precautions should be taken to prevent injuries such as falling down stairs or climbing out of a window. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 You probably do not need to visit your health care provider. Discuss your condition with your provider if: You also have other symptoms Sleepwalking is frequent or persistent You do dangerous activities (such as driving) while sleepwalking Prevention 
 
 Sleepwalking may be prevented by the following: Do not use alcohol or anti-depressant medicines if you sleepwalk. Avoid sleep deprivation, and try to prevent insomnia, because these can trigger sleepwalking. Avoid or minimize stress, anxiety, and conflict, which can worsen the condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Walking during sleep; Somnambulism References 
 
 Chokroverty S, Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds. Bradley's  Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 68. Dyken ME, Lin-Dyken DC, Bajpai S. Sleepwalking. In: Chokroverty S, Thomas RJ, eds.  Atlas of Sleep Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Zadra A, Desautels A, Petit D. Somnambulism: clinical aspects and pathophysiological hypotheses.  Lancet Neurol . 2013;12(3):285-294. PMID: 23415568  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23415568 . Read More 
 
 Confusion 
 Dizziness 
 Drowsiness 
 Neurocognitive disorder 
 Seizures 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutger's New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia