
 Sleep disorders in older adults 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sleep disorders in older adults involve any disrupted sleep pattern. This can include problems falling or staying asleep, too much sleep, or abnormal behaviors with sleep. Causes 
 
 Sleep problems are common in older adults. The amount of sleep needed stays constant throughout the adult years. Doctors recommend that adults get 7 to 8 hours of sleep each night. In older adults, sleep is less deep and choppier than sleep in younger people.  A healthy 70-year-old may wake up several times during the night without it being due to disease. Sleep disturbances in older adults may be due to any of the following: Alzheimer disease Alcohol Changes in the body's natural internal clock, causing some people to fall asleep earlier in the evening Long-term (chronic) disease, such as  heart failure Certain medicines, herbs, supplements, and recreational drugs Depression  (depression is a common cause of sleep problems in people of all ages) Brain and nervous system conditions Not being very active Pain caused by diseases such as  arthritis Stimulants such as  caffeine  and nicotine Frequent  urination at night Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms that may occur include: Difficulty falling asleep Difficulty telling the difference between night and day Early morning awakening Waking up often during the night  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will take a history and perform a physical exam to look for medical causes and determine which type of sleep disorder is causing the problem. Treatment 
 
 Relieving chronic pain and controlling medical conditions such as frequent urination may improve sleep in some people. Treating depression can also improve sleep. Sleeping in a quiet room that isn't too hot or too cold and having a relaxing bedtime routine may help improve symptoms. Other ways to promote sleep include these healthy lifestyle tips: Avoid large meals shortly before bedtime. Avoid stimulants such as caffeine after mid-afternoon. Get regular exercise early in the day. Go to bed and wake up at the same time every day. DO NOT take naps. Use the bed only for sleep or sexual activity. If you can't fall asleep after 20 minutes, get out of bed and do a quiet activity such as reading or listening to music. Avoid using sleeping pills to help you sleep, if possible. They can lead to dependence and can make sleep problems worse over time if you don't use them the right way. Your provider should assess your risks of daytime sleepiness, mental (cognitive) side effects, and falls before you begin taking sleep medicines. If you think you need sleeping pills, talk with your provider about which pills are safe for you when taken properly. Certain sleeping pills should not be taken on a long-term basis. DO NOT drink alcohol at any time when you are using sleeping pills. Alcohol can make the side effects of all sleeping pills worse. WARNING: The FDA has asked manufacturers of certain sleep medicines to put stronger warning labels on their products so that consumers are more aware of the potential risks. Possible risks while taking such medicines include severe allergic reactions and dangerous sleep-related behaviors, including sleep-driving. Ask your provider about these risks. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 For most people, sleep improves with treatment. However, others may continue to have sleep disruptions. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications are: Alcohol use Drug abuse  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if a lack of sleep or too much sleep is interfering with daily living. Prevention 
 
 Getting regular exercise and avoiding as many causes of sleep disruption as possible and adequate exposure to natural light may help control sleep problems.  Alternative Names 
 
 Insomnia - older adults Images 
 
 
 Sleep patterns in the young and aged 
 References 
 
 NIH Senior Health. Sleep and aging. Updated December 2012.  nihseniorhealth.gov/sleepandaging/aboutsleep/01.html . Accessed October 14, 2016. Shochat T, Ancoli-Israel S. Insomnia in older adults. In: Kryger M, Roth T, Dement WC, eds.  Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 153. Sterniczuk R, Rusak B. Sleep in relation to aging, frailty, and cognition. In: Fillit HM, Rockwood K, Young J, eds.  Brocklehurst's Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 108. Read More 
 
 Alzheimer disease 
 Arthritis 
 Caffeine in the diet 
 Depression - older adults 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Neurocognitive disorder 
 Urinating more at night 
 
 Review Date 8/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia