
 Slipped capital femoral epiphysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A slipped capital femoral epiphysis is a separation of the ball of the hip joint from the thigh bone (femur) at the upper growing end (growth plate) of the bone. Causes 
 
 A slipped capital femoral epiphysis may affect both hips. An epiphysis is an area at the end of a  long bone . It is separated from the main part of the bone by the growth plate. In this condition, the problem occurs in the upper area while the bone is still growing. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis occurs in about 2 out of every 100,000 children. It is more common in: Growing children ages 11 to 15, especially boys Children who are obese Children who are growing rapidly Children with hormone imbalances caused by other conditions are at higher risk for this disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Difficulty walking , walking with a limp Knee pain Hip pain Hip stiffness Outward-turning leg Restricted hip movements  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. A hip or  pelvis x-ray  can confirm this condition. Treatment 
 
 Surgery to stabilize the bone with pins or screws will prevent the ball of the hip joint from slipping or moving out of place. Some surgeons may suggest using pins on the other hip at the same time. This is because many children will develop this problem in that hip later. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is most often good with treatment. In rare cases, the hip joint may wear away, despite prompt diagnosis and treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 This disorder is linked to a greater risk of  osteoarthritis  later in life. Other potential but rare complications include reduced blood flow to the hip joint and wearing away of hip joint tissue. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If your child has ongoing pain or other symptoms of this disorder, have the child lie down right away and stay still until you get medical help. Prevention 
 
 Weight control for obese children may be helpful. Many cases are not preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Femoral epiphysis - slipped References 
 
 Sankar WN, Horn BD, Wells L, Dormans JP. The hip. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 678. Sawyer JR, Spence DD. Fractures and dislocations in children. In: Azar FM, Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Long bones 
 Osteoarthritis 
 
 Review Date 12/9/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hip Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia