
 Small bowel bacterial overgrowth 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Small bowel bacterial overgrowth is a condition in which very large numbers of bacteria grow in the small intestine. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, the small intestine does not have a high number of bacteria. Excess bacteria in the small intestine may use up the nutrients needed by the body. As a result, a person may become  malnourished .  The breakdown of nutrients by the excess bacteria can also damage the lining of the small intestine. This can make it even harder for the body to absorb nutrients. Conditions that can lead to overgrowth of bacteria in the small intestine include:  Complications of diseases or surgery that create pouches or blockages in the small intestine.  Crohn disease  is one of these conditions. Diseases that lead to movement problems in the small bowel, such as  diabetes  and  scleroderma . Immunodeficiency such as  AIDS  or immunoglobulin deficiency. Short bowel syndrome  caused by surgical removal of the small intestine. Small bowel diverticulosis, in which small sacs occur in the inner lining of the intestine. These sacs allow too many bacteria to grow. These sacs are much more common in the large bowel.  Surgical procedures that create a loop of small intestine where excess bacteria can grow. An example is a Billroth II type of stomach removal ( gastrectomy ).  Some cases of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Symptoms 
 
 The most common symptoms are: 
  Abdominal fullness
   
  Abdominal pain and cramps
   
  Bloating
   
  Diarrhea (usually watery)
   
  Gassiness
   Other symptoms may include: 
  
  Fatty stool
  
   
  Weight loss
   Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history. Tests may include: Blood chemistry tests (such as albumin level) Complete blood count ( CBC ) Fecal fat test Small intestine  x-ray Vitamin levels in the blood Small intestine biopsy or culture Special breath tests Treatment 
 
 The goal is to treat the cause of the bacterial overgrowth. Treatment most often consists of antibiotics. In some cases, drugs that speed intestinal movement (motility-speeding drugs) may be used. A low carbohydrate diet can be helpful. Treatment also involves getting enough fluids and nutrition. A person who is dehydrated may need intravenous (IV) fluids in a hospital. A person who is malnourished may also need nutrition given through a vein (total parenteral nutrition -- TPN).  Possible Complications 
 
 Severe cases lead to malnutrition. Other possible complications include: Dehydration Excess bleeding due to vitamin deficiency Liver disease Osteomalacia  or  osteoporosis Alternative Names 
 
 Overgrowth - intestinal bacteria; Bacterial overgrowth - intestine; Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth; SIBO References 
 
 Manolakis CS, Rutland TJ, Di Palma JA. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. In: McNalley PR, ed.  GI/Liver Secrets Plus . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 44. Quigley EMM. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 105. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Dehydration 
 Gastrectomy 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Irritable bowel syndrome 
 Liver disease 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Short bowel syndrome 
 Toxic megacolon 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia