
 Snake bites 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Snake bites occur when a snake bites the skin. They are medical emergencies if the snake is venomous. Venomous animals account for a large number of deaths and injuries worldwide. Snakes alone are estimated to inflict 2.5 million venomous bites each year, resulting in about 125,000 deaths. The actual number may be much larger. Southeast Asia, India, Brazil, and areas of Africa have the most deaths due to snakebite. Considerations 
 
 Snake bites can be deadly if not treated quickly. Because of their smaller body size, children are at higher risk for death or serious complications due to snake bites. The right antivenom can save a person's life. Getting to an emergency room as quickly as possible is very important. If properly treated, many snake bites will not have serious effects. Causes 
 
 Most species of snake are harmless and their bites are not life threatening. Venomous snake bites include bites by any of the following: Cobra Copperhead Coral snake Cottonmouth (water moccasin) Rattlesnake Various snakes found at zoos Most snakes will avoid people if possible, but all snakes will bite as a last resort when threatened or surprised. If you are bitten by any snake, treat it seriously. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the type of snake, but may include: Bleeding from wound Blurred vision Burning of the skin Convulsions Diarrhea Dizziness Excessive sweating Fainting Fang marks in the skin Fever Increased thirst Loss of muscle coordination Nausea and vomiting Numbness and tingling Rapid pulse Tissue death Severe pain Skin discoloration Swelling  at the site of the bite Weakness Rattlesnake bites are painful when they occur. Symptoms usually begin right away and may include: Bleeding Breathing difficulty Blurred vision Eyelid drooping Low blood pressure Nausea and vomiting Numbness Pain at site of bite Paralysis Rapid pulse Skin color changes Swelling Tingling Tissue damage Thirst Tiredness Weakness Weak pulse Cottonmouth and copperhead bites are painful right when they occur. Symptoms, which usually begin right away, may include: Bleeding Breathing difficulty Low blood pressure Nausea and vomiting Numbness and tingling Pain at site of bite Shock Skin color changes Swelling Thirst Tiredness Tissue damage Weakness Weak pulse Coral snake bites may be painless at first. Major symptoms may not develop for hours. Do NOT make the mistake of thinking you will be fine if the bite area looks good and you are not in a lot of pain. Untreated coral snake bites can be deadly. Symptoms may include: Blurred vision Breathing difficulty Convulsions Drowsiness Eyelid drooping Headache Low blood pressure Mouth watering ( excessive salivation ) Nausea and vomiting Numbness Pain and swelling at site of bite Paralysis Shock Slurred speech  
 Swallowing difficulty 
  Swelling of tongue and throat Weakness Skin color changes Skin tissue damage Stomach or abdominal pain Weak pulse First Aid 
 
 Follow these steps to provide first aid: 1. Keep the person calm. Reassure them that bites can be effectively treated in an emergency room. Restrict movement, and keep the affected area below heart level to reduce the flow of venom. 2. Remove any rings or constricting items, because the affected area may swell. Create a loose splint to help restrict movement of the area. 3. If the area of the bite begins to swell and change color, the snake was probably venomous. 4. Monitor the person's  vital signs  -- temperature,  pulse , rate of breathing, and blood pressure -- if possible. If there are signs of  shock  (such as  paleness ), lay the person flat, raise the feet about a foot (30 centimeters), and cover the person with a blanket. 5. Get medical help right away. 6. Bring in the dead snake only if this can be done safely. Do not waste time hunting for the snake, and do not risk another bite if it is not easy to kill the snake. Be careful of the head when transporting it -- a snake can actually bite (from a reflex) for several hours after it's dead. DO NOT 
 
 Follow these precautions: Do NOT allow the person to become over-exerted. If necessary, carry the person to safety. Do NOT apply a tourniquet. Do NOT apply cold compresses to a snake bite. Do NOT cut into a snake bite with a knife or razor. Do NOT try to suck out the venom by mouth. Do NOT give the person  stimulants  or  pain medicines  unless a doctor tells you to do so. Do NOT give the person anything by mouth. Do NOT raise the site of the bite above the level of the person's heart.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or your local emergency number if someone has been bitten by a snake. If possible, call ahead to the emergency room so that antivenom can be ready when the person arrives. Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Prevention 
 
 To prevent snake bites: Avoid areas where snakes may be hiding, such as under rocks and logs. Even though most snakes are not venomous, avoid picking up or playing with any snake unless you have been properly trained. Don't provoke a snake. That is when many serious snake bites occur. Tap ahead of you with a walking stick before entering an area where you can't see your feet. Snakes will try to avoid you if given enough warning. When hiking in an area known to have snakes, wear long pants and boots if possible.  Alternative Names 
 
 Bites - snakes  Images 
 
 
 Snake bite on the finger 
 Snake bite on the finger 
 Snake bite 
 Venomous snakes - series 
 Snakebite (venomous) treatment - Series 
 References 
 
 Norris RL. Venomous snakebites in North America. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine.  2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 139. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia