
 Sodium carbonate poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sodium carbonate (known as washing soda or soda ash) is a chemical found in many household and industrial products. This article focuses on poisoning due to sodium carbonate. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. 
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Sodium carbonate Where Found 
 
 Sodium carbonate is found in: Automatic dishwashing soaps Clinitest (diabetes testing) tablets Glass products Pulp and paper products Some bleaches Some bubble bath solutions Some steam iron cleaners  Note: This list is not all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Breathing problems due to throat swelling Collapse Diarrhea Drooling Eye irritation, redness, and pain Hoarseness Low blood pressure (may develop rapidly) Severe pain in the mouth, throat, chest, or abdominal area Shock Skin irritation Swallowing difficulty Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person one glass of water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 If readily available, determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the  national toll-free Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including:  Temperature Pulse Breathing rate Blood pressure  Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Blood Tests Breathing support -- including oxygen, endotracheal intubation (tube through the nose or mouth into the trachea) and ventilator (breathing machine) EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Endoscopy -- a camera is moved down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach Eye irrigation Fluids (intravenous or through the vein) Medicines to treat symptoms X-rays of chest and abdomen  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Sodium carbonate is usually not very toxic. However, if you swallow very large amounts, you may have symptoms. In this rare situation, long-term effects, even death, are possible if you do not receive quick and aggressive treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Sal soda poisoning; Soda ash poisoning; Disodium salt poisoning; Carbonic acid poisoning; Washing soda poisoning References 
 
 Sioris LJ, Schuller HK. Soaps, detergents, and bleaches. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 102. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 6/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia