
 Solitary fibrous tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) is a noncancerous  tumor  of the lining of the lung and chest cavity, an area called the pleura. SFT used to be called localized fibrous mesothelioma. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of SFT remains unknown. This type of tumor affects men and women equally.  Symptoms 
 
 About half of the people with this type of tumor do not show any symptoms. If the tumor grows to a large size and pushes on the lung, it can lead to symptoms, such as: Chest pain Chronic  cough Shortness of breath Clubbed appearance of the fingers Exams and Tests 
 
 SFT is usually found by accident when a   chest x-ray  is done for other reasons. If the health care provider suspects SFT, tests will be ordered. These may include: CT scan of the chest Open lung biopsy The diagnosis of SFT is difficult compared with the cancerous type of this disease, called  malignant mesothelioma , which is caused by exposure to asbestos. SFT is not caused by asbestos exposure. Treatment 
 
 Treatment is usually to remove the tumor. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is expected to be good with prompt treatment. In rare cases, the tumor may return. Possible Complications 
 
 Fluid escaping into the membranes around the lungs ( pleural effusion ) is a complication. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you notice symptoms of SFT. Alternative Names 
 
 Mesothelioma - benign; Mesothelioma - fibrous; Pleural fibroma
 Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Haithcock BE, Zagar TM, Zhang L, Stinchcombe TE. Diseases of the pleura and mediastinum. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 73. Myers JL, Arenberg DA. Benign lung tumors. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 56. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Pleural effusion 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mesothelioma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia