
 Speech disorders - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A speech disorder is a condition in which a person has problems creating or forming the speech sounds needed to communicate with others. Three common speech disorders are: 
   Articulation disorders
    
   Disfluency
    
   Voice disorders
    Speech disorders are different from  language disorders in children , such as:  Getting their meaning or message across to others Understanding the message coming from others  Causes 
 
 Speech is one of the main ways in which we communicate with those around us. It develops naturally, along with other signs of  normal growth and development . Disfluencies are disorders in which a person repeats a sound, word, or phrase.  Stuttering  may be the most serious disfluency. Articulation disorders  may have no clear cause. They may also occur in other family members. Other causes include: 
   Problems or changes in the structure or shape of the muscles and bones used to make speech sounds. These changes may include  cleft palate  and tooth problems.
    
   Damage to parts of the brain or the nerves (such as from  cerebral palsy ) that control how the muscles work together to create speech.
    Voice disorders are caused by problems when air passes from the lungs, through the vocal cords, and then through the throat, nose, mouth, and lips. A voice disorder may be due to: 
  Acid from the stomach moving upward ( GERD )
    Cancer of the throat 
   Cleft palate or other problems with the palate
    Conditions that damage the nerves  that supply the muscles of the vocal cords
    
   Laryngeal webs or clefts (a birth defect in which a thin layer of tissue is between the vocal cords)
    
   Noncancerous growths (polyps, nodules, cysts, granulomas, papillomas, or ulcers) on the vocal cords
    
   Overuse of the vocal cords from screaming, constantly clearing the throat, or singing
    Symptoms 
 
 DISFLUENCY Stuttering is the most common type of disfluency.  Symptoms of disfluency can include:
  Repetition of sounds, words, or parts of words or phrases after age 4 (I want...I want my doll. I...I see you.) Putting in (interjecting) extra sounds or words (We went to the...uh...store.) Making words longer (I am Boooobbby Jones.) Pausing during a sentence or words, often with the lips together Tension in the voice or sounds Frustration with attempts to communicate Head jerking while talking Eye blinking while talking Embarrassment with speech  ARTICULATION DISORDER Sounds may be distorted (changed) Sounds (most often consonants) will be substituted, left off, added, or changed Errors may make it hard for people to understand the person (only family members may be able to understand a child)  VOICE DISORDERS Hoarseness or raspiness to the voice Voice may break in or out Pitch of the voice may change suddenly Voice may be too loud or too soft Person may run out of air during a sentence Speech may sound odd because too much air is escaping through the hose (hypernasality) or too little air is coming out through the nose (hyponasality)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests can help diagnose speech disorders: Denver Articulation Screening Examination Early Language Milestone Scale Denver II test Peabody Picture Test Revised A hearing test may also be done. Treatment 
 
 Milder forms of speech disorders may disappear on their own. Speech therapy may help with more severe symptoms or speech problems that do not improve. In therapy, the child will learn how to create certain sounds. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook depends on the cause of the disorder. Speech can often be improved with speech therapy. Early treatment is likely to have better results. Possible Complications 
 
 Speech disorders may lead to psychosocial problems associated with ineffective communication. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your child's speech is not developing according to normal milestones You think your child is in a high-risk group Your child is showing signs of a speech disorder Prevention 
 
 Intellectual disability and hearing loss make children more likely to develop speech disorders. At-risk infants should be referred to an audiologist for a hearing test. Hearing and speech therapy can then be started, if necessary. As young children begin to speak, some disfluency is common. Children lack a large vocabulary and have difficulty expressing themselves. This results in broken speech. If you place excessive attention on the disfluency, a stuttering pattern may develop. The best way to prevent stuttering, therefore, is to avoid paying too much attention to the disfluency. Alternative Names 
 
 Articulation deficiency; Voice disorders; Vocal disorders; Disfluency; Communication disorder - speech disorder; Speech disorder - stuttering References 
 
 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. Child speech and language: speech disorders.  www.asha.org/public/speech/disorders/childsandl.htm . Accessed March 10, 2016. Choi SS, Zalzal GH. Voice disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 203. Simms MD, Schum RL. Language development and communication disorders, In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 35. Read More 
 
 Autism spectrum disorder 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Hearing loss 
 Intellectual disability 
 Normal growth and development 
 Schizophrenia 
 Stuttering 
 Tourette syndrome 
 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Speech and Language Problems in Children 
 Browse the Encyclopedia