
 Speech impairment (adult) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Speech and language impairment may be any of several problems that make it difficult to communicate. Considerations 
 
 The following are common speech and language disorders. APHASIA Aphasia is loss of the ability to understand or express spoken or written language. It commonly occurs after strokes or traumatic brain injuries. It can also occur in people with brain tumors or degenerative diseases that affect the language areas of the brain. This term does not apply to children who have never developed communication skills. There are many different types of aphasia. In some cases of aphasia, the problem eventually corrects itself, but in others, it doesn't get better.
 DYSARTHRIA With  dysarthria , the person has problems expressing certain sounds or words. They have poorly pronounced speech (such as slurring) and the rhythm or speed of speech is changed. Usually, a nerve or brain disorder has made it difficult to control the tongue, lips, larynx, or vocal cords, which make speech. Dysarthria, which is difficulty pronouncing words, is sometimes confused with aphasia, which is difficulty producing language. They have different causes. People with dysarthria may also have problems swallowing. VOICE DISTURBANCES Anything that changes the shape of the vocal cords or the way they work will cause a voice disturbance. Lump-like growths such as nodules, polyps, cysts, papillomas, granulomas, and cancers can be to blame. These changes cause the voice to sound different from the way it normally sounds. Causes 
 
 Some of these disorders develop gradually, but anyone can develop a speech and language impairment suddenly, usually in a trauma. APHASIA Alzheimer disease Brain tumor (more common in aphasia than dysarthria) Dementia Head trauma Stroke Transient ischemic attack (TIA)  DYSARTHRIA Alcohol intoxication Dementia Diseases that affect nerves and muscles (neuromuscular diseases), such as  amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  (ALS or Lou Gehrig disease), cerebral palsy, myasthenia gravis, or  multiple sclerosis  (MS) Facial trauma Facial weakness, such as  Bell's palsy  or tongue weakness Head trauma Head and neck cancer surgery Nervous system (neurological) disorders that affect the brain, such as  Parkinson disease  or  Huntington disease  (more common in dysarthria than aphasia) Poorly fitting dentures Side effects of medicines that act on the central nervous system, such as narcotics, phenytoin, or carbamazepine Stroke Transient ischemic attack (TIA) VOICE DISTURBANCES Growths or nodules on the vocal cords People who use their voice heavily (teachers, coaches, vocal performers) are more likely to develop voice disorders.  Home Care 
 
 For dysarthria, ways to help  improve communication  include speaking slowly and using hand gestures. Family and friends need to provide plenty of time for those with the disorder to express themselves. Typing on an electronic device or using pen and paper can also help with communication. For aphasia, family members may need to provide frequent orientation reminders, such as the day of the week. Disorientation and confusion often occur with aphasia.Using  nonverbal ways of communicating  may also help. It's important to maintain a relaxed, calm environment and keep external  stimuli  to a minimum. Speak in a normal tone of voice (this condition is not a hearing or emotional problem). Use simple phrases to avoid misunderstandings. Don't assume that the person understands. Provide communication aids, if possible, depending on the person and condition.  Mental health counseling may help with  depression  or frustration that many people with speech impairment have. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact the provider if: Impairment or loss of communication comes on suddenly There is any unexplained impairment of speech or written language What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Unless the problems have developed after an emergency event, the provider will take a medical history and perform a physical exam. The medical history may require the assistance of family or friends. The provider will likely ask about the speech impairment. Questions may include when the problem developed, whether there was an injury, and what medicines the person takes. Diagnostic tests that may be performed include the following: Blood tests Cerebral angiography  to check blood flow in the brain CT  or  MRI  scan of the head to check for problems such as tumor EEG  to measure electrical activity of the brain Electromyography ( EMG ) to check the health of the muscles and the nerves that control the muscles Lumbar puncture  to check the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord Urine tests X-rays of the skull  If the tests find other medical problems, other specialist doctors will need to be consulted. For help with the speech problem, a speech and language therapist or social worker will likely need to be consulted. Alternative Names 
 
 Language impairment; Impairment of speech; Inability to speak; Aphasia; Dysarthria; Slurred speech; Dysphonia voice disorders References 
 
 Halpern H, Goldfarb R.  Language and Motor Speech Disorders in Adults . 3rd ed. Burlington, MA: Jones and Bartlett Learning. 2013.  Kirshner HS. Aphasia and aphasic syndromes. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 13. Kirshner HS. Dysarthria and apraxia of speech. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14. 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aphasia 
 Speech and Communication Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia