
 Sputum stain for mycobacteria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sputum stain for mycobacteria is a test to check for a type of bacteria that cause tuberculosis and other infections. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test requires a sample of sputum.  To do this, you will be asked to  cough  deeply and spit the substance that comes up from the lungs (sputum) into a container. You may be asked to breathe in a mist of salty steam. This makes you cough more deeply and produce sputum. If you still do not produce enough sputum, you might have a  bronchoscopy .  The test sample is examined under a microscope. Another test, called a culture, is done to confirm the results. A culture test takes a few days to get results. This sputum test can give your doctor a quick answer.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 It can help to drink a lot of fluids the night before the test. It makes the test more accurate if it is done first thing in the morning. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort, unless a bronchoscopy needs to be performed. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed when the doctor suspects  tuberculosis  or other Mycobacterium infection. Normal Results 
 
 Results are normal when no mycobacterial organisms are found. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results show that the stain is positive for: Mycobacterium tuberculosis Mycobacterium avium-intracellular Other mycobacteria or acid-fast bacteria  Risks 
 
 There are no risks, unless bronchoscopy is performed. Considerations 
 
 To increase the accuracy of this test, it is sometimes done three times, often three days in a row. More sophisticated tests are sometimes used to stain sputum for mycobacteria. Check with your health care provider to see if these are available in the laboratory. Alternative Names 
 
 Acid fast bacilli stain; AFB stain; Tuberculosis smear; TB smear Images 
 
 
 Sputum test 
 References 
 
 Murray PR. The clinician and the microbiology laboratory. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglass, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 16. Septimus EJ. Pleural effusion and empyema. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglass, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 11/24/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Levy, MD, PhD, Infectious Diseases, Lutherville Personal Physicians, Lutherville, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mycobacterial Infections 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia