
 Stools - foul smelling 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Foul-smelling stools are stools with a very bad odor. They very often have to do with what you eat, but may be a sign of a medical condition. Considerations 
 
 Stools normally have an unpleasant odor. Most of the time, the odor is familiar. Stools that have an extremely bad, abnormal odor may be due to certain medical conditions. Foul-smelling stools also have normal causes, such as diet changes. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Celiac disease - sprue Crohn disease Chronic pancreatitis Cystic fibrosis Intestinal infection Malabsorption Short bowel syndrome Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on what is causing the problem. Things you can do include: Follow your health care provider's instructions. If you have been given a special diet, stick to it closely. If you have diarrhea, drink more fluids so you do not get dehydrated.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have: Black or pale stools Blood in the stool Changes in the stool related to diet Chills Cramping Fever Pain in the abdomen Weight loss  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history. Questions may include: When did you first notice the change? Are the stools an abnormal color (such as  pale or clay-colored stools )? Are your stools hard to flush? What sort of diet have you eaten recently? Does a change in your diet make the smell worse or better? What other symptoms do you have?  The provider may take a stool sample. Other tests may be needed. Alternative Names 
 
 Foul-smelling stools; Malodorous stools Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Juckett G, Trivedi R. Evaluation of chronic diarrhea.  Am Fam Physician . 2011;84(10):1119-1126. PMID: 22085666.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22085666 . McQuaid KR. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Read More 
 
 Stools - floating 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia