
 Stool ova and parasites exam 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stool ova and parasites exam is a lab test to look for parasites or eggs (ova) in a stool sample. The parasites are associated with intestinal infections. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A stool sample is needed.  There are many ways to collect the sample. You can collect the sample: On plastic wrap. Place the wrap loosely over the toilet bowl so that it is held in place by the toilet seat. Put the sample in a clean container given to you by your health care provider. In a test kit that supplies a special toilet tissue. Put it in a clean container given to you by your provider.  Do not mix urine, water, or toilet tissue with the sample. For children wearing diapers: Line the diaper with plastic wrap. Position the plastic wrap so that it will prevent urine and stool from mixing. This will provide a better sample.  Return the sample to your provider's office or lab as directed. At the lab, a small smear of stool is placed on a microscope slide and examined. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The laboratory test does not involve you. There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have signs of parasites,  diarrhea  that does not go away, or other intestinal symptoms. Normal Results 
 
 There are no parasites or eggs in the stool sample. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means parasites or eggs are present in the stool. This is a sign of a parasitic infection, such as:  Amebiasis Giardiasis Strongyloidiasis Taeniasis Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Parasites and stool ova exam; Amebiasis - ova and parasites; Giardiasis - ova and parasites; Strongyloidiasis - ova and parasites Taeniasis - ova and parasites Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Beavis, KG, Charnot-Katsikas, A. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 64. DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Hall GS, Woods GL. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 58. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25thed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140.  Siddiqi HA, Salwen MJ, Shaikh MF. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrintestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 22.  Read More 
 
 Amebiasis 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Giardia infection 
 Trichomoniasis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Giardia Infections 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia