
 Stuffy or runny nose - adult 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A stuffy or congested nose occurs when the tissues lining it become swollen. The swelling is due to inflamed blood vessels.  The problem may also include nasal discharge or "runny nose." If excess mucus runs down the back of your throat (postnasal drip), it may cause a cough or sore throat. Causes 
 
 A stuffy or runny nose may be caused by: Common cold Flu Sinus infection The congestion typically goes away by itself within a week. Congestion also can be caused by: Hay fever  or other allergies Use of some nasal sprays or drops bought without a prescription for more than 3 days (may make nasal stuffiness worse) Nasal polyps , sac-like growths of inflamed tissue lining the nose or sinuses Pregnancy Vasomotor rhinitis Home Care 
 
 Finding ways to keep mucus thin will help it drain from your nose and sinuses and relieve your symptoms. Drinking plenty of clear fluids is one way to do this. You can also:  Apply a warm, moist washcloth to your face several times a day. Inhale steam 2 to 4 times a day. One way to do this is to sit in the bathroom with the shower running. Do not inhale hot steam. Use a vaporizer or humidifier.  A nasal wash can help remove mucus from your nose.  You can buy a saline spray at a drugstore or make one at home. To make one, use 1 cup (240 milliliters) of warm water, 1/2  teaspoon (3 grams) of salt, and a pinch of baking soda. Use gentle saline nasal sprays 3 to 4 times per day.  Congestion is often worse when lying down. Keep upright, or at least keep the head elevated.  Some stores sell adhesive strips that can be placed on the nose. These help widen the nostrils, making breathing easier.  Medicines you can buy at the store without a prescription can help your symptoms.  Decongestants are drugs that shrink and dry up your nasal passages. They may help dry up a runny or stuffy nose. Antihistamines  are drugs that treat allergy symptoms. Some antihistamines make you drowsy so use with care. Nasal sprays can relieve stuffiness. Don't use over-the-counter nasal sprays more often than 3 days on and 3 days off, unless told to by your health care provider.  Many cough, allergy, and cold medicines you buy have more than one medicine inside. Read the labels carefully to make sure you don't take too much of any 1 medicine. Ask your provider which cold medicines are safe for you If you have allergies: Your provider may also prescribe nasal sprays that treat allergy symptoms. Learn how to avoid triggers that make  allergies worse .  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider for any of the following:  A stuffy nose with swelling of the forehead, eyes, side of the nose, or cheek, or that occurs with blurred vision More throat pain, or white or yellow spots on the tonsils or other parts of the throat Discharge from the nose that has a bad smell, comes from only one side, or is a color other than white or yellow Cough that lasts longer than 10 days, or produces yellow-green or gray mucus Nasal discharge following a head injury Symptoms that last more than 3 weeks Nasal discharge with fever  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider may perform a physical exam that focuses on the ears, nose, throat, and airways.  Tests that may be done include:  Allergy  skin and blood tests Blood tests Sputum culture  and  throat culture X-rays of the sinuses  and  chest x-ray Alternative Names 
 
 Nose - congested; Congested nose; Runny nose; Postnasal drip; Rhinorrhea: nasal congestion Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 References 
 
 Bachert C, Calus L, Gevaert P. Rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43. Corren J, Baroody FM, Pawankar R. Allergic and nonallergic rhinitis. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 42. Read More 
 
 Enlarged adenoids 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Common Cold 
 Drug Reactions 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Sinusitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia