
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage is bleeding in the area between the brain and the thin tissues that cover the brain. This area is called the subarachnoid space. Causes 
 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage can be caused by: Bleeding from a tangle of blood vessels called an  arteriovenous malformation  (AVM) Bleeding disorder Bleeding from a  cerebral aneurysm Head injury Unknown cause (idiopathic) Use of blood thinners  Subarachnoid hemorrhage caused by injury is often seen in the elderly who have fallen and hit their head. Among the young, the most common injury leading to subarachnoid hemorrhage is motor vehicle crashes. Risks include: Aneurysm  in other blood vessels Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) and other connective tissue disorders High blood pressure History of  polycystic kidney disease Smoking  A strong family history of aneurysms may also increase your risk. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a severe headache that starts suddenly (often called thunderclap headache). It is often worse near the back of the head. Many people often describe it as the "worst headache ever" and unlike any other type of headache pain. The headache may start after a popping or snapping feeling in the head. Other symptoms: Decreased consciousness  and alertness Eye discomfort in bright light ( photophobia ) Mood and personality changes, including  confusion  and irritability Muscle aches  (especially  neck pain  and  shoulder pain ) Nausea and vomiting Numbness in part of the body Seizure Stiff neck Vision problems , including  double vision , blind spots, or temporary vision loss in one eye  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Eyelid drooping Pupil size difference Sudden stiffening of back and neck, with arching of the back ( opisthotonos ; not very common)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs include: A physical exam may show a stiff neck A brain and nervous system exam may show signs of decreased nerve and brain function (focal  neurologic deficit ) An eye exam may show decreased eye movements. A sign of damage to the cranial nerves (in milder cases, no problems may be seen on an eye exam)  If your doctor thinks you have a subarachnoid hemorrhage, a  head CT scan  (without contrast dye) will be done right away. In some cases, the scan is normal, especially if there has only been a small bleed. If the CT scan is normal, a lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) may be done. Other tests that may be done include: Cerebral angiography  of blood vessels of the brain CT scan angiography (using contrast dye) Transcranial Doppler ultrasound, to look at blood flow in the arteries of the brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and  magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA) (occasionally)  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to: Save your life Repair the cause of bleeding Relieve symptoms Prevent complications such as permanent brain damage (stroke)  Surgery may be done to: Remove large collections of blood or relieve pressure on the brain if the hemorrhage is due to an injury Repair the aneurysm if the hemorrhage is due to an aneurysm rupture  If the person is critically ill, surgery may have to wait until the person is more stable. Surgery may involve: Craniotomy  (cutting a hole in the skull) and aneurysm clipping, to close the aneurysm Endovascular coiling , placing coils in the aneurysm and  stents  in the blood vessel to cage the coils reduces the risk of further bleeding  If no aneurysm is found, the person should be closely watched by a health care team and may need more imaging tests. Treatment for coma or decreased alertness includes: Draining tube placed in the brain to relieve pressure Life support Methods to protect the airway Special positioning  A person who is conscious may need to be on strict bed rest. The person will be told to avoid activities that can increase pressure inside the head, including: Bending over Straining Suddenly changing position  Treatment may also include: Medicines given through an  IV line  to control blood pressure Nimodipine to prevent artery spasms Painkillers and anti-anxiety medicines to relieve headache and reduce pressure in the skull Phenytoin or other medications to prevent or treat seizures Stool softeners or laxatives to prevent straining during bowel movements  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person with subarachnoid hemorrhage does depends on a number of different factors, including: Location and amount of bleeding Complications  Older age and more severe symptoms can lead to a poorer outcome. People can recover completely after treatment. But some people die even with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Repeated bleeding is the most serious complication. If a cerebral aneurysm bleeds for a second time, the outlook is much worse. Changes in consciousness and alertness due to a subarachnoid hemorrhage may become worse and lead to  coma  or death. Other complications include: Complications of surgery Medicine side effects Seizures Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Prevention 
 
 Identifying and successfully treating an aneurysm can prevent subarachnoid hemorrhage. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemorrhage - subarachnoid References 
 
 Mayer SA. Hemorrhagic cerebrovascular disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 408. Reinhardt MR. Subarachnoid hemorrhage.  J Emerg Nurs . 2010;36:327-329. PMID: 20624566  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20624566 .  Tateshima S, Duckwiler G. Vascular diseases of the nervous system: intracranial aneurysms and subarachnoid hemorrhage. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 51C. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 Cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Headache - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding 
 Brain Aneurysm 
 Hemorrhagic Stroke 
 Browse the Encyclopedia