
 Subconjunctival hemorrhage 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a bright red patch appearing in the white of the eye. This condition is one of several disorders called red eye. Causes 
 
 The white of the eye (sclera) is covered with a thin layer of clear tissue called the bulbar  conjunctiva . A subconjunctival hemorrhage occurs when a small blood vessel breaks open and bleeds within the conjunctiva. The blood is often very visible, but since it is confined within the conjunctiva, it does not move and cannot be wiped away. The problem may occur without injury. It is often first noticed when you wake up and look in a mirror. Some things that may cause a subconjuctival hemorrhage include: Sudden increases in pressure, such as violent sneezing or coughing Having  high blood pressure  or taking blood thinners Rubbing the eyes Viral infection Certain eye surgeries or injuries A subconjunctival hemorrhage is common in newborn infants. In this case, the condition is thought to be caused by the pressure changes across the infant's body during childbirth. Symptoms 
 
 A bright red patch appears on the white of the eye. The patch does not cause pain and there is no discharge from the eye. Vision does not change.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and look at your eyes. Blood pressure should be tested. If you have other areas of bleeding or bruising, more specific tests may be needed. Treatment 
 
 No treatment is needed. You should have your blood pressure checked regularly. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A subconjunctival hemorrhage most often goes away on its own in about 2 to 3 weeks. The white of the eye may look yellow as the problem goes away.  Possible Complications 
 
 In most cases, there are no complications. Rarely, a total subconjunctival hemorrhage may be a sign of a serious vascular disorder in elderly persons. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if a bright red patch appears on the white of the eye. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Bhatt U, Lagnado R, Harminder SD. Follicular conjunctivitis. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology.  2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol. 4, chap 7. Crouch Jr ER, Crouch ER. Trauma: Ruptures and bleeding. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Clinical Ophthalmology.  2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol. 4, chap 61. Wright JL, Wightman JM. Red and painful eye. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 22.  Read More 
 
 Conjunctiva 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding 
 Eye Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia