
 Subdural effusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A subdural effusion is a collection of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) trapped between the surface of the brain and the outer lining of the brain (the dura matter). If this fluid becomes infected, the condition is called a subdural empyema. Causes 
 
 A subdural effusion is a rare complication of  meningitis  caused by bacteria. Subdural effusion is more common in infants. Subdural effusion may also occur after head trauma. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Outward curving of a baby's soft spot ( bulging fontanelle ) Increased head circumference No energy ( lethargy ) Persistent fever Seizures Abnormally wide spaces in the bony joints of a baby's skull ( separated sutures ) Vomiting Weakness or loss of movement on both sides of the body Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. To detect the subdural effusion, tests that may be done include: CT scan of the head 
   Head size (circumference) measurements
    MRI scan of the head Ultrasound  of the head
    Treatment 
 
 Surgery to drain the effusion is often necessary. Rarely, a permanent drainage device (shunt) is needed to drain fluid. Antibiotics may need to be given through a vein. Treatment may include: Surgery to drain the effusion Drainage device, called a shunt, left in place for a short time or longer time Antibiotics given through a vein to treat the infection Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Full recovery from a subdural effusion is expected. If nervous system problems continue, they are generally due to the meningitis, not the effusion. Long-term antibiotics is usually not needed. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of surgery may include: 
   Bleeding
    
   Brain damage
    
   Infection
    When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the provider if: 
   Your child has recently been treated for meningitis and symptoms continue
    
   New symptoms develop
    References 
 
 Heegaard WG, Biros MH. Head injury. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 41. Kim KS. Bacterial meningitis beyond the neonatal period. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 31. Nath A. Meningitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 412. Read More 
 
 Meningitis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia