
 Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia is a condition that affects the movement of the eyes. Causes 
 
 This disorder occurs because the brain is sending and receiving faulty information through the nerves that control eye movement. The nerves themselves are healthy. People who have this problem often have  progressive supranuclear palsy  (PSP). This is a disorder that affects the way the brain controls movement.  Other disorders that have been associated with this condition include: Inflammation of the brain ( encephalitis ) Disease that causes areas deep in the brain, just above the spinal cord, to shrink ( olivopontocerebellar atrophy ) Disease of the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control voluntary muscle movement ( amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ) Malabsorption disorder of the small intestine ( Whipple disease ) Symptoms 
 
 People with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia are unable to move their eyes at will in all directions, especially looking upward. Other symptoms may include: Mild dementia Stiff and uncoordinated movements like those of  Parkinson disease Those of the disorder associated with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms, focusing on the eyes and nervous system. Tests will be done to check for diseases linked with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia.  Magnetic resonance imaging  (MRI) might show shrinking of the brainstem. Treatment 
 
 The treatment depends on the cause of the supranuclear ophthalmoplegia. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause of the supranuclear ophthalmoplegia. Alternative Names 
 
 Progressive supranuclear palsy - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Encephalitis - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Olivopontocerebellar atrophy - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Whipple disease - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Dementia - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia References 
 
 Lavin PJM. Neuro-ophthalmology. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 44. Ling H. Clinical approach to progressive supranuclear palsy.  J Mov Disord . 2016;9(1):3-13. PMID: 26828211  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26828211 . Read More 
 
 Progressive supranuclear palsy 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia