
 Sutures - separated 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Separated sutures are abnormally wide spaces in the bony joints of the skull in an infant. Considerations 
 
 The skull of an infant or young child is made up of bony plates that allow for growth. The borders where these plates come together are called sutures or suture lines. In an infant only a few minutes old, the pressure from delivery may compress the head. This makes the bony plates overlap at the sutures and creates a small ridge. This is normal in newborns. In the next few days the baby's head expands. The overlap disappears and disappears and the edges of the bony plates meet edge to edge. This is the normal position. Diseases or conditions that cause an abnormal increase in the pressure within the head can cause the sutures to spread apart. These separated sutures can be a sign of pressure within the skull ( increased intracranial pressure ). Separated sutures may be associated with  bulging fontanelles . If intracranial pressure is increased a lot, there may be large veins over the scalp. Causes 
 
 The problem may be caused by: Arnold-Chiari malformation Battered child syndrome Bleeding inside the brain (intraventricular hemorrhage) Brain tumor Certain vitamin deficiencies Dandy-Walker malformation Down syndrome Hydrocephalus Infections that are present at birth (congenital infections) Lead poisoning Meningitis Subdural hematoma  or  subdural effusion Underactive thyroid gland ( hypothyroidism )  When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Contact your health care provider if your child has: Separated sutures,  bulging fontanelles , or very obvious scalp veins Redness, swelling, or discharge from the area of the sutures What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. This will include examining the fontanelles and scalp veins and feeling (palpating) the sutures to find out how far they are separated. The provider will ask questions about the child's medical history and symptoms, including: Does the child have other symptoms (such as abnormal  head circumference )? When did you first notice the separated sutures? Does it seem to be getting worse? Is the child otherwise well? (For example, are eating and activity patterns normal?)  The following tests may be performed: MRI of the head CT scan of the head Ultrasound  of the head Infectious disease work-up, including  blood cultures  and possible  spinal tap Metabolic work-up, such as blood tests to look at  electrolyte  levels Standard eye exam Although your provider keeps records from routine checkups, you might find it helpful to keep your own records of your child's development. Bring these records to your provider's attention if you notice anything unusual. Alternative Names 
 
 Separation of the sutures Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 References 
 
 Carlo WA. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88 Read More 
 
 Fontanelles - bulging 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Malformations 
 Browse the Encyclopedia