
 SVC obstruction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 SVC obstruction is a narrowing or blockage of the superior vena cava, which is the second largest vein in the human body. The superior vena cava moves blood from the upper half of the body to the heart. Causes 
 
 Superior vena cava (SVC) obstruction is a relatively rare condition. It is most often caused by cancer or a tumor in the mediastinum (the area of the chest under the breastbone and between the lungs). The types of cancer that can lead to this condition include: Breast cancer Lymphoma Metastatic lung cancer  (lung cancer that spreads) Testicular cancer Thyroid cancer Thymus tumor  Superior vena cava obstruction can also be caused by noncancerous conditions that cause scarring. These conditions include: Histoplasmosis  (a type of fungal infection) Inflammation of a vein ( thrombophlebitis ) Lung infections (such as  tuberculosis )  Other causes of superior vena cava obstruction include: Aortic aneurysm  (a widening of the artery that leaves the heart) Blood clots in the superior vena cava Constrictive pericarditis  (tightening of the thin lining of the heart) Effects of radiation therapy for certain medical conditions Enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter)  Catheters placed in the large veins of the upper arm and neck may cause blood clots in the superior vena cava. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms occur when something blocks the blood flowing back to the heart. They may begin suddenly or gradually, and may worsen when you bend over or lie down. Early signs include: Swelling around the eye Swelling of the face Swelling of the whites of the eyes  The swelling will most likely be worse in the early morning hours and go away by mid-morning. The most common symptoms are  shortness of breath  (dyspnea) and swelling of the face, neck, trunk, and arms. Other possible symptoms include: Decreased alertness Dizziness Fainting Headache Reddish face or cheeks Reddish palms Reddish mucus membranes (inside the nose, mouth, and other places) Redness changing to blueness later Sensation of head or ear "fullness" Vision changes  Exams and Tests 
 
 An examination may show enlarged veins of the face, neck, and upper chest. Blood pressure is often high in the arms and low in the legs. A  bronchoscopy  (a lighted tube placed through the mouth into the windpipe and lungs) may be performed if  lung cancer  is suspected. Blockage of the SVC may be visible on: Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest  or  MRI of chest Coronary angiography  (a heart blood vessel study) Doppler ultrasound  (sound wave test of the blood vessels) Radionuclide ventriculography  (nuclear study of heart motion)  This disease may also affect the results of the following tests: Abdominal MRI  or CT scan Liver scan Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve the blockage. Diuretics (water pills) or steroids may be used to temporarily relieve  swelling . Other treatment options may include radiation or  chemotherapy  to shrink the tumor, or surgery to remove the tumors. Surgery to bypass the obstruction is rarely performed. Placement of a  stent  to open up the SVC is available at some medical centers. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies, depending on the cause and the amount of blockage. SVC syndrome caused by a tumor is a sign that the tumor has spread, and it indicates a poorer long-term outlook. Possible Complications 
 
 The throat could become blocked, which can block the airways. Increased pressure may develop in the brain, leading to changed levels of consciousness, nausea, vomiting, or vision changes. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of SVC obstruction. Complications are serious and can sometimes be fatal. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of other medical disorders may reduce the risk of developing SVC obstruction. Alternative Names 
 
 Superior vena cava obstruction; Superior vena cava syndrome Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 References 
 
 Rice TW, Rodriguez MR, Light RW. The superior vena cava syndrome: clinical characteristics and evolving etiology.  Medicine (Baltimore) . 2006;85;1:37-42. PMID: 16523051  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16523051 .  Ugras-Rey SS. Selected oncologic emergencies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 123. Wilson LD, Detterbeck FC, Yahalom J. Superior vena cava syndrome with malignant causes.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1862-9. PMID: 17476012  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17476012 . Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Chronic 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Pericarditis - constrictive 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Thrombophlebitis 
 
 Review Date 1/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia