
 Swan-Ganz - right heart catheterization 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Swan-Ganz catheterization is the passing of a thin tube (catheter) into the right side of the heart and the arteries leading to the lungs. It is done to monitor the heart's function and blood flow and pressures in and around the heart. This test is most often done in people who are very ill. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test can be done while you are in bed in an intensive care unit (ICU) of a hospital. It can also be done in special procedure areas such as a  cardiac catheterization  laboratory. Before the test starts, you may be given medicine (sedative) to help you relax. You will lie on a padded table. Your doctor will make a small surgical cut near the groin or in your neck. A flexible tube (catheter or sheath) is placed through the cut into a vein. Sometimes, it will be placed in your leg or your arm. You will be awake during the procedure. A longer catheter is inserted. It is then carefully moved into the upper chamber of the right side of the heart. X-ray images may be used to help the health care provider see where the catheter should be placed. Blood may be removed from the catheter. This blood is tested to measure the amount of oxygen in the blood. During the procedure, your heart's rhythm will be constantly watched using an  electrocardiogram  (ECG). How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink anything for 8 hours before the test starts. You may need to stay in the hospital the night before the test. Otherwise, you will check in to the hospital the morning of the test. You will wear a hospital gown. You must sign a consent form before the test. Your provider will explain the procedure and its risks. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may be given medicine to help you relax before the procedure. You will be awake and able to follow instructions during the test. You may feel some discomfort when the IV is placed into your arm. You may also feel some pressure at the site when the catheter is inserted. In people who are critically ill, the catheter may stay in place for several days. You may feel discomfort when the area of the vein is numbed with anesthetic. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The procedure is done to evaluate how the blood moves (circulates) in people who have: Abnormal pressures in the heart arteries Burns Congenital heart disease Heart failure Kidney disease Leaky heart valves Lung problems Shock It may also be done to monitor for complications of a  heart attack . It also shows how well certain heart medicines are working. Swan-Ganz catheterization can also be used to detect abnormal blood flow between two areas of the heart that are not normally connected. Conditions that can also be diagnosed or evaluated with Swan-Ganz catheterization include: Cardiac tamponade Pulmonary hypertension Restrictive cardiomyopathy Normal Results 
 
 Normal results for this test are: Cardiac index is 2.8 to 4.2 liters per minute per square meter (of body surface area) Pulmonary artery systolic pressure is 17 to 32 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) Pulmonary artery mean pressure is 9 to 19 mm Hg Pulmonary diastolic pressure is 4 to 13 mm Hg Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is 4 to 12 mm Hg Right atrial pressure is 0 to 7 mm Hg What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Blood flow problems, such as heart failure or shock Heart valve disease Lung disease Structural problems with the heart, such as a shunt from an atrial or  ventricular septal defect Risks 
 
 Risks of the procedure include: Bruising around the area where the catheter was inserted Injury to the vein Puncture to the lung if the neck or chest veins are used, causing lung collapse ( pneumothorax ) Very rare complications include: Cardiac  arrhythmias  requiring treatment
  Cardiac tamponade Embolism  caused by  blood clots  at the tip of the catheter Infection Low blood pressure Alternative Names 
 
 Right heart catheterization; Catheterization - right heart Images 
 
 
 Swan Ganz catheterization 
 References 
 
 Davidson CJ, Bonow RO. Cardiac catheterization. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 19. Kern M. Catheterization and angiography. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 57. Sturgess DJ. Haemodynamic monitoring. In: Bersten AD, Soni N, eds.  Oh's Intensive Care Manual . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Burns 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Congenital heart disease 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 8/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Critical Care 
 Heart Diseases 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia