
 Sweating - absent 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abnormal lack of sweat in response to heat may be harmful, because sweating allows heat to be released from the body. The medical term for absent sweating is anhidrosis. Considerations 
 
 Anhidrosis sometimes goes unrecognized until a substantial amount of heat or exertion fails to cause sweating. Overall lack of  sweating  can be life-threatening because the body will overheat. If the lack of sweating happens in a small area only, it is usually not as dangerous. Causes 
 
 Cause of anhidrosis may include: Burns Certain genetic syndromes Certain nerve problems (neuropathies) Congenital disorders including ectodermal dysplasia Dehydration Neurologic disorders such as Guillain-Barre syndrome Skin diseases or scarring of the skin that block sweat glands Trauma to sweat glands Use of certain drugs  Home Care 
 
 If there is a danger of overheating, take the following measures: Take a cool shower or sit in a bathtub with cool water Drink plenty of fluids Stay in a cool environment Move slowly DO NOT do heavy exercise  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a general lack of sweating or an abnormal lack of sweating when exposed to heat or strenuous exercise. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. In emergencies, the health care team will perform rapid cooling measures and give you fluids to stabilize you. You may be asked about your symptoms and medical history.  You may be asked to wrap yourself in an electric blanket or sit in a sweatbox while the health care team watches your body's reaction. A skin biopsy may be done. Genetic testing may be done if appropriate. Treatment depends on the cause of your lack of sweating. You may be given medicine to cause sweating. Alternative Names 
 
 Decreased sweating; Anhidrosis Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Miller JL. Diseases of the eccrine and apocrine sweat glands. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Sweating 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sweat 
 Browse the Encyclopedia