
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis, or syphilitic meningitis, is a complication of untreated  syphilis . It involves inflammation of the tissues covering the brain and spinal cord. Causes 
 
 Syphilitic meningitis is a form of  neurosyphilis . This condition is a life-threatening complication of syphilis infection. Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection. Syphilitic meningitis is similar to  meningitis  caused by other germs (organisms). Risks for syphilitic meningitis include a past infection with syphilis or other sexually transmitted illnesses such as  gonorrhea . Syphilis infections are mainly spread through sex with an infected person. Sometimes, they may be passed by nonsexual contact. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of syphilitic meningitis may include: Changes in vision , such as blurred vision, decreased vision
    Fever Headache Mental status changes, including  confusion,  decreased attention span, and irritability Nausea and vomiting Stiff neck or shoulders, muscle aches Seizures Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) and loud noises 
   Sleepiness,  lethargy , hard to wake up Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show problems with the nerves, including nerves that control eye movement. Tests may include: Cerebral angiography  to check blood flow in the brain Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) to measure electrical activity in the brain Head CT scan Spinal tap to remove a sample of  cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)  for examination VDRL blood test  or  RPR blood test  to screen for a syphilis infection  If screening tests show a syphilis infection, more tests are done to confirm the diagnosis. Tests include: FTA-ABS MHA-TP TP-PA TP-EIA  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to cure the infection and stop symptoms from getting worse. Treating the infection helps prevent new nerve damage and may reduce symptoms. Treatment does not reverse existing damage. Medicines likely to be given include: Penicillin or other antibiotics (such as tetracycline or erythromycin) for a long time to make sure the infection goes away Medicines for seizures Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some people may need help eating, dressing, and caring for themselves. Confusion and other mental changes may either improve or continue long-term after antibiotic treatment. Late-stage syphilis can cause nerve or heart damage. This can lead to disability and death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Inability to care for self Inability to communicate or interact Seizures that may result in injury Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have seizures. Call your provider if you have a severe headache with fever or other symptoms, especially if you have a history of syphilis infection. Prevention 
 
 Proper treatment and follow-up of syphilis infections will reduce the risk of developing this type of meningitis. If you are sexually active,  practice safer sex  and always use condoms. All pregnant women should be screened for  syphilis . Alternative Names 
 
 Meningitis - syphilitic; Neurosyphilis - syphilitic meningitis Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis ( Treponema pallidum ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 239. Tunkel AR, van de Beek D, Scheld WM. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 89. Read More 
 
 Confusion 
 Headache 
 Meningitis 
 Neurosyphilis 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Syphilis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia