
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease. In this disease, the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. It can affect the skin, joints, kidneys, brain, and other organs. Causes 
 
 The cause of autoimmune diseases is not fully known. SLE is more common in women than men. It may occur at any age. However, it appears most often in people between the ages of 15 and 44. The disease affects African Americans and Asians more often than people from other races. Certain drugs  may also cause SLE.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary from person to person, and may come and go. Almost everyone with SLE has  joint pain  and swelling. Some develop  arthritis . SLE often affects the joints of the fingers, hands, wrists, and knees. Other common symptoms include: Chest pain when taking a deep breath. Fatigue. Fever with no other cause. General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling (malaise). Hair loss. Mouth sores. Sensitivity to sunlight. Skin rash: A "butterfly" rash in about half the people with SLE. The rash is most often seen over the cheeks and bridge of the nose. It can be widespread. It gets worse in sunlight. Swollen lymph nodes .  Other symptoms depend on which part of the body is affected: Brain and nervous system: Headaches, numbness, tingling, seizures, vision problems, and personality changes Digestive tract: Abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting Heart: Abnormal heart rhythms ( arrhythmias ) Lung: Coughing up blood and difficulty breathing Skin: Patchy skin color and fingers that change color when cold ( Raynaud phenomenon ) Kidney: Swelling in the legs, weight gain  Some people have only skin symptoms. This is called discoid lupus. Exams and Tests 
 
 To be diagnosed with lupus, you must have 4 out of 11 common signs of the disease. Nearly all people with lupus have a positive test for antinuclear antibody (ANA). However, having a positive ANA alone does not mean you have lupus.  The health care provider will do a complete physical exam. You may have a rash, arthritis, or edema in the ankles. There may be an abnormal sound called a heart friction rub or pleural friction rub. Your provider will also do a nervous system exam. Tests used to diagnose SLE may include: Antinuclear antibody (ANA) CBC with differential Chest x-ray Serum creatinine Urinalysis You may also have other tests to learn more about your condition. Some of these are: Antinuclear antibody (ANA) panel Complement components  (C3 and C4) Coombs test - direct Cryoglobulins ESR  and CRP Kidney function blood tests Liver function blood tests Rheumatoid factor Antiphospholipid antibodies and lupus anticoagulant test Kidney biopsy Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for SLE. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms. Severe symptoms that involve the heart, lungs, kidneys, and other organs often need treatment from specialists.  Mild forms of the disease may be treated with: NSAIDs for joint symptoms and pleurisy. Talk to your provider before taking these drugs. Low doses of corticosteroids, such as prednisone, for skin and arthritis symptoms. Corticosteroid creams for skin rashes. Hydroxychloroquine, a drug also used to treat malaria. Belimumab, a biologic drug, may be helpful in some people,  Treatments for more severe SLE may include: High-dose corticosteroids. Immunosuppressive drugs (drugs which dampen or suppress the immune system). These medicines are used if you do not get better with corticosteroids, or if your symptoms get worse when you stop taking them. Blood thinners, such as Coumadin, for clotting disorders. If you have SLE, it is also important to: Wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen when in the sun. Get preventive heart care. Stay up-to-date with immunizations. Have tests to screen for thinning of the bones (osteoporosis). Avoid tobacco and drink minimal amounts of alcohol.  Support Groups 
 
 Counseling and support groups  may help with the emotional issues involved with the disease.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome for people with SLE has improved in recent years. Many people with SLE have mild symptoms. How well you do depends on how severe the disease is.  The disease tends to be more active:  During the first years after diagnosis In people under age 40  Many women with SLE can get pregnant and deliver a healthy baby. A good outcome is more likely for women who receive proper treatment and do not have serious heart or kidney problems. However, the presence of SLE antibodies raises the risk of miscarriage.  Possible Complications 
 
 Some people with SLE have abnormal deposits in the kidney cells. This leads to a condition called  lupus nephritis . People with this problem may develop  kidney failure . They may need  dialysis  or a kidney transplant. SLE can cause damage in many different parts of the body, including: Blood clots in arteries of veins of the legs, lungs, brain, or intestines Destruction of red blood cells or  anemia of chronic disease Fluid around the heart (pericarditis), or inflammation of the heart ( myocarditis  or  endocarditis ) Fluid around the lungs and damage to lung tissue Pregnancy problems, including miscarriage Stroke Severely low blood platelet count (platelets are needed to stop any bleeding) Inflammation of the blood vessels Both SLE and some of the medicines used for SLE can harm an unborn child. Talk to your provider before you become pregnant. If you become pregnant, find a provider who is experienced with lupus and pregnancy. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of SLE. Also call if you have this disease and your symptoms get worse or a new symptom occurs.  Alternative Names 
 
 Disseminated lupus erythematosus; SLE; Lupus; Lupus erythematosus; Butterfly rash - SLE; Discoid lupus Images 
 
 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Lupus, discoid  - view of lesions on the chest 
 Lupus, discoid on a child's face 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus rash on the face 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Arntfield RT, Jicks CM. Systemic lupus erythematosus and the vasculitides. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 118. Crow MK. Etiology and pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 79.  Crow MK. Systemic lupus erythematosus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 266. Lisnevskaia L, Murphy G, Isenberg D. Systemic lupus erythematosus.  Lancet . 2014;384(9957):1878-1888. PMID: 24881804  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24881804 . 
  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Antibody 
 Arthritis 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Blood clots 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Chest pain 
 Confusion 
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus 
 Endocarditis 
 Headache 
 Heart palpitations 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Joint pain 
 Lupus anticoagulants and antiphospholipid antibodies 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Myocarditis 
 Neurocognitive disorder 
 Pericarditis 
 Platelet count 
 Pleural effusion 
 Pleurisy 
 Psychosis 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 Rashes 
 Seizures 
 Skin nodules 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 
 Review Date 1/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lupus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia