
 Tailbone trauma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tailbone trauma is an injury to the small bone at the lower tip of the spine. Considerations 
 
 Actual  fractures  of the tailbone (coccyx) are not common. Tailbone trauma usually involves  bruising  of the bone or pulling of the ligaments. Causes 
 
 Backward falls onto a hard surface, such as a slippery floor or ice, are the most common cause of this injury. Symptoms 
 
 Bruising on the lower part of the spine Pain when sitting or putting pressure on the tailbone First Aid 
 
 For tailbone trauma when no  spinal cord injury  is suspected: Relieve pressure on the tailbone by sitting on an inflatable rubber ring or cushions. Take acetaminophen for pain. Take a stool softener to avoid constipation. If you suspect injury to the neck or spine, do not attempt to move the person. DO NOT 
 
 Do NOT attempt to move the person if you think there may be injury to the spinal cord. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for immediate medical help if: Spinal cord injury is suspected The person can't move Pain is severe Prevention 
 
 Do NOT run on slippery surfaces, such as around a swimming pool. Dress in shoes with good tread or slip-resistant soles, especially in snow or on ice. Alternative Names 
 
 Coccyx injury  Images 
 
 
 Tailbone (coccyx) 
 References 
 
 Choi SB, Cwinn AA. Pelvic trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 55. Vora A, Yin AX. Coccydynia. In: Frontera, WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 103. Read More 
 
 Bleeding into the skin 
 Broken bone 
 
 Review Date 1/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Dennis Ogiela, MD, Orthopedic Surgeon, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tailbone Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia