
 Takayasu arteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Takayasu arteritis is an inflammation of the aorta and  its major branches . The aorta is the artery that carries blood from the heart to the rest of the body. Causes 
 
 The cause of Takayasu arteritis is unknown. The disease occurs mainly in children and women between the ages of 20 to 40. It is more common in people of East Asian, Indian or Mexican descent. Several genes that increase the chance of having this problem were recently found.  Takayasu arteritis appears to be an autoimmune condition. This means the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. The condition may also involve other organ systems. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Arm weakness or pain with use Chest pain Dizziness Fatigue Fever Lightheadedness Muscle or joint pain Skin rash Night sweats Vision changes Weight loss  Decreased radial pulses (at the wrist) Difference in blood pressure between the 2 arms High blood pressure ( hypertension ) There may also be signs of inflammation ( pericarditis  or  pleuritis ). Exams and Tests 
 
 Possible tests include: Arteriogram Angiogram Complete blood count  (CBC) C-reactive protein  (CRP) Electrocardiogram  (ECG) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) Magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA) Magnetic resonance imaging  (MRI) Computed tomography  (CT) Ultrasound X-ray of the chest Treatment 
 
 Treatment of Takayasu arteritis is difficult. However, people who have the right treatment can see positive results. It is important to identify the condition early.  MEDICINES Most people are first treated with high doses of steroids. Immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine, mycophenolate, methotrexate, or leflunomide are often added.  Biologic agents including TNF inhibitors such as infliximab are recommended for people who do not improve with the previous treatment.  In difficult cases, tocilizumab or rituximab may be helpful.  SURGERY Surgery is used to open up narrowed arteries  to supply blood or open up the constriction. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This disease can be fatal without treatment. However, a combined treatment approach using medicines and surgery has lowered death rates. Adults have a better chance of survival than children. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blood clot Heart attack Heart failure Pericarditis Pleuritis Stroke  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of this condition. Weak pulse, chest pain, and breathing difficulty require immediate care. Alternative Names 
 
 Pulseless disease Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 References 
 
 Clifford A, Hoffman GS. Recent advances in the medical management of Takayasu arteritis: an update on use of biologic therapies. Curr Opin Rheumatol . 2014;26(1): 7-15. PMID: 24225487  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24225487 . Glebova NO, Abularrage CJ. Takayasu's disease. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston W, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 80. Renauer PA, Saruhan-Direskeneli G, Coit P, et al. Identification of susceptibility loci in IL6, RPS9/LILRB3, and an intergenic locus on chromosome 21q22 in Takayasu Arteritis in a genome-wide association study.  Arthritis Rheumatol . 2015;67:1361-1368. PMID: 25604533  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25604533 . Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Heart attack 
 Pericarditis 
 Pleurisy 
 Pulse 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 10/18/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia