
 Tapeworm infection - Hymenolepsis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hymenolepsis infection is an infestation by 1 of 2 species of tapeworm:  Hymenolepis nana  or  Hymenolepis diminuta . The disease is also called hymenolepiasis. Causes 
 
 Hymenolepis live in warm climates and are common in the southern United States. Insects eat the eggs of these worms. Humans and other animals become infected when they eat material contaminated by insects (including fleas associated with rats). In an infected person, it is possible for the worm's entire life cycle to be completed in the bowel, so infection can last for years. Hymenolepis nana  infections are much more common than  Hymenolepis diminuta  infections in humans. These infections used to be common in the southeastern United States, in crowded environments, and in people who were confined to institutions. However, the disease occurs throughout the world. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms occur only with heavy infections. Symptoms include: Diarrhea Gastrointestinal discomfort Itchy anus Poor appetite Weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 A  stool exam  for the tapeworm eggs confirms the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 The treatment for this condition is a single dose of praziquantel, repeated in 10 days. Household members may also need to be screened and treated because the infection can be spread from person to person. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Expect full recovery following treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from this infection include: Abdominal discomfort Dehydration  from prolonged diarrhea When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have chronic diarrhea or abdominal cramping. Prevention 
 
 Good hygiene, public health and sanitation programs, and elimination of rats help prevent the spread of hymenolepiasis. Alternative Names 
 
 Hymenolepiasis; Dwarf tapeworm infection; Rat tapeworm; Tapeworm - infection Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Fischer PR, White AC. Adult tapeworm infections. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 302. Mega JD, Galdos-Cardenas G, Gilman RH. Tapeworm infections. In: Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET, eds.  Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 126. Read More 
 
 Dehydration 
 Tapeworm infection - beef or pork 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia