
 Tapeworm infection - beef or pork 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Beef or pork tapeworm infection is an infection with the tapeworm parasite found in beef or pork. Causes 
 
 Tapeworm infection is caused by eating the raw or undercooked meat of infected animals. Cattle usually carry  Taenia saginata  ( T. saginata ). Pigs carry  Taenia solium (T. solium) . In the human intestine, the young form of the tapeworm from the infected meat (larva) develops into the adult tapeworm. A tapeworm can grow to longer than 12 feet (3.5 meters) and can live for years. Tapeworms have many segments. Each segment is able to produce eggs. The eggs are spread alone or in groups, and can pass out with the stool or through the anus. Adults and children with pork tapeworm can infect themselves if they have poor hygiene. They can ingest tapeworm eggs they pick up on their hands while wiping or scratching their anus or the skin around it. Those who are infected can expose other people to  T. solium  eggs, usually through food handling. Symptoms 
 
 Tapeworm infection usually does not cause any symptoms. Some people may have abdominal discomfort. People often realize they are infected when they pass segments of the worm in their stool, especially if the segments are moving. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done to confirm diagnosis of an infection include: CBC , including  differential count Stool exam  for eggs of  T. solium  or  T. saginata , or bodies of the parasite Treatment 
 
 Tapeworms are treated with medicines taken by mouth, usually in a single dose. The drug of choice for tapeworm infections is praziquantel. Niclosamide can also be used. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, the tapeworm infection goes away. Possible Complications 
 
 In rare cases, worms can cause a blockage in the intestine. If pork tapeworm larvae move out of the intestine, they can cause local growths and damage tissues such as the brain, eye, or heart. This condition is called  cysticercosis . Infection of the brain (neurocysticercosis) can cause  seizures  and other nervous system problems. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you pass something in your stool that looks like a white worm. Prevention 
 
 In the United States, laws on feeding practices and the inspection of domestic food animals have largely eliminated tapeworms. Measures you can take to prevent tapeworm infection include: Do not eat raw meat. Cook whole cut meat to 145째F (63째C) and ground meat to 160째F (71째C). Use a food thermometer to measure the thickest part of the meat. Freezing meat is not a reliable because it may not kill all eggs. Wash hands well after using the toilet, especially after a bowel movement. Alternative Names 
 
 Teniasis; Pork tapeworm; Beef tapeworm; Tapeworm;  Taenia saginata ;  Taenia solium ; Taeniasis Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 King CH, Fairley JK. Tapeworms (cestodes). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 291. White Jr AC, Brunetti E. Cestodes. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 354. Read More 
 
 Cysticercosis 
 Fish tapeworm infection 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia