
 Td (tetanus and diphtheria) vaccine - what you need to know 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 All content below is taken in its entirety from the CDC Td Vaccine Information Statement (VIS):  www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/td.pdf CDC review information for Td VIS: Page last reviewed: February 24, 2015 Page last updated: February 24, 2015 Issue date of VIS: February 24, 2015  Content source:  National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases Information 
 
 Why get vaccinated? Tetanus and diphtheria are very serious diseases. They are rare in the United States today, but people who do become infected often have severe complications. Td vaccine is used to protect adolescents and adults from both of these diseases. Both diphtheria and tetanus are infections caused by bacteria. Diphtheria spreads from person to person through secretions from coughing or sneezing. Tetanus-causing bacteria enter the body through cuts, scratches, or wounds. TETANUS  (Lockjaw) causes painful muscle tightening and stiffness, usually all over the body. It can lead to tightening of muscles in the head and neck so you can't open your mouth, swallow, or sometimes even breathe. Tetanus kills about 1 out of every 10 people who are infected, even after receiving the best medical care.  DIPHTHERIA  can cause a thick coating to form in the back of the throat. It can lead to breathing problems, heart failure, paralysis, and death.  Before vaccines, as many as 200,000 cases of diphtheria and hundreds of cases of tetanus were reported in the United States each year. Since vaccination began, reports of cases for both diseases have dropped by about 99%.  Td Vaccine Td vaccine can protect adolescents and adults from tetanus and diphtheria. Td is usually given as a booster dose every 10 years but it can also be given earlier after a severe and dirty wound or burn. Another vaccine, called Tdap, which protects against pertussis in addition to tetanus and diphtheria, is sometimes recommended instead of Td vaccine.  Your doctor or the person giving you the vaccine can give you more information. Td may safely be given at the same time as other vaccines. Some people should not get this vaccine A person who has ever had a life-threatening allergic reaction after a previous dose of any tetanus or diphtheria containing vaccine, OR has a severe allergy to any part of this vaccine should not get Td vaccine.  Tell the person giving the vaccine about any severe allergies. Talk to your doctor if you: Have seizures or another nervous system problem Had  severe  pain or swelling after any vaccine containing diphtheria or tetanus Ever had a condition called Guillain Barré Syndrome (GBS) Aren't feeling well on the day the shot is scheduled  Risks of a vaccine reaction With any medicine, including vaccines, there is a chance of side effects. These are usually mild and go away on their own.  Serious reactions are also possible, but are rare. Most people who get Td vaccine do not have any problems with it. Mild problems  following a Td vaccine  (Did not interfere with activities) Pain where the shot was given (about 8 people in 10) Redness or swelling where the shot was given (about 1 person in 4) Mild fever (rare) Headache (about 1 person in 4) Tiredness (about 1 person in 4)  Moderate problems  following a Td vaccine  (Interfered with activities, but did not require medical attention) Fever over 102°F (rare)  Severe problems  following a Td vaccine (Unable to perform usual activities; required medical attention) Swelling, severe pain, bleeding and/or redness in the arm where the shot was given (rare).  Problems that could happen after any vaccine: People sometimes faint after a medical procedure, including vaccination. Sitting or lying down for about 15 minutes can help prevent fainting, and injuries caused by a fall. Tell your doctor if you feel dizzy, or have vision changes or ringing in the ears. Some people get severe pain in the shoulder and have difficulty moving the arm where a shot was given. This happens very rarely. Any medication can cause a severe allergic reaction. Such reactions from a vaccine are very rare, estimated at fewer than 1 in a million doses, and would happen within a few minutes to a few hours after the vaccination.  As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing serious injury or death.  The safety of vaccines is always being monitored. For more information, visit:  www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety What is there is a serious reaction? What should I look for? Look for anything that concerns you, such as signs of a severe allergic reaction, very high fever, or unusual behavior.  Signs of a severe allergic reaction can include hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, and weakness. These would usually start a few minutes to a few hours after the vaccination.  What should I do? If you think it is a severe allergic reaction or other emergency that can't wait, call 9-1-1 or get the person to the nearest hospital. Otherwise, call your doctor. Afterward, the reaction should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your doctor might file this report, or you can do it yourself through the VAERS web site at  www.vaers.hhs.gov  or by calling  1-800-822-7967 .  VAERS does not give medical advice. The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Persons who believe they may have been injured by a vaccine can learn about the program and about filing a claim by calling  1-800-338-2382  or visiting the VICP web site at  www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation . There is a time limit to file a claim for compensation. How can I learn more? Ask your doctor. He or she can give you the vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of information. Call your  local or state health department .  Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Call  1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO) Visit CDC's web site at  www.cdc.gov/vaccines References 
 
 Vaccine information statement: Td Vaccine (tetanus and diphtheria) What You Need to Know. Centers for Disease Control and website.  www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/td.pdf . Accessed April 21, 2015. 
 Review Date 2/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia