
 Telangiectasia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Telangiectasias are small, widened blood vessels on the skin. They are usually harmless, but may be associated with several diseases. Causes 
 
 Telangiectasias may develop anywhere within the body. But they are most easily seen on the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes. Usually, they do not cause symptoms. Some telangiectasias bleed and cause significant problems. Telangiectasias may also occur in the brain and cause major problems from bleeding. Causes may include: Rosacea Aging Genetics Pregnancy Sun exposure Varicose veins  Diseases associated with this condition include: Ataxia - telangiectasia Bloom syndrome Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia  (Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome) Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome Nevus flammeus  such as  port-wine stain Rosacea Spider angioma Sturge-Weber disease Xeroderma pigmentosa When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice enlarged vessels in the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, including: Where are the blood vessels located? Do they bleed easily and without reason? What other symptoms are present?  Tests may be needed to diagnose or rule out a medical condition. Tests may include: Blood tests CT scans Liver function studies MRI scans X-rays  Sclerotherapy is the treatment for telangectasias on the legs. In this procedure, a saline (salt) solution or other chemical is injected directly into the spider veins on the legs. Laser treatment is typically used to treat telangiectasias of the face. Alternative Names 
 
 Vascular ectasias; Spider veins Images 
 
 
 Angioma serpiginosum 
 Telangiectasia - legs 
 Telangiectasias - upper arm 
 References 
 
 James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Cutaneous vascular diseases. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 35. Kelly R, Baker C. Other vascular disorders. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Bleeding 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Varicose Veins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia