
 Tenosynovitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tenosynovitis is inflammation of the lining of the sheath that surrounds a tendon (the cord that joins muscle to bone). Causes 
 
 The synovium is a lining of the protective sheath that covers tendons. Tenosynovitis is inflammation of this sheath. The cause of the inflammation may be unknown, or it may result from: Diseases that cause inflammation Infection Injury Overuse Strain The wrists, hands, ankles, and feet are commonly affected because the tendons are long across those joints. But, the condition may occur with any tendon sheath. An infected cut to the hands or wrists that causes tenosynovitis may be an emergency requiring surgery. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Difficulty moving the joint Joint swelling  in the affected area Pain  and tenderness around the joint Pain when moving the joint Redness along the length of the tendon  Fever, swelling, and redness may indicate an infection, especially if a puncture or cut caused these symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a  physical examination . The provider may touch or stretch the tendon. You may be asked to move the joint to see if it's painful. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve pain and reduce inflammation. Rest or keeping the affected tendons still is essential for recovery. Your provider may suggest the following: Using a splint or removable brace to help keep the tendons still Applying heat or cold to the affected area to help reduce pain and inflammation Medicines such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or corticosteroid injection to relieve pain and reduce inflammation In rare cases, surgery to remove the inflammation around the tendon Tenosynovitis caused by infection needs to be treated right away. Your provider will prescribe antibiotics. In severe cases, emergency surgery is needed to release the pus around the tendon. Ask your provider about strengthening exercises that you can do after you recover. These may help prevent the condition from coming back. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people fully recover with treatment. If tenosynovitis is caused by overuse and the activity is not stopped, it is likely to come back. If the tendon is damaged, recovery may be slow or the condition may become chronic (ongoing). Possible Complications 
 
 If tenosynovitis is not treated, the tendon may become permanently restricted or it may tear (rupture). The affected joint can become stiff. Infection in the tendon may spread, which could be serious and threaten the affected limb. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you have pain or difficulty straightening a joint or limb. Call right away if you notice a red streak on your hand, wrist, ankle, or foot. This is a sign of an infection. Prevention 
 
 Avoiding repetitive movements and overuse of tendons may help prevent tenosynovitis. Use the appropriate wound care techniques to clean cuts to the hand, wrist, ankle, and foot. Alternative Names 
 
 Inflammation of the tendon sheath References 
 
 Biundo JJ. Bursitis, tendinitis, and other periarticular disorders and sports medicine. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 263. Schmidt MJ, Adams SL. Tendinopathy and bursitis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 117. Read More 
 
 Strains  
 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tendinitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia