
 Testicle pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Testicle pain is discomfort in one or both  testicles . The pain can spread into the lower abdomen. Causes 
 
 The testicles are very sensitive. Even a minor injury can cause pain. In some conditions, abdominal pain may occur before testicle pain. Common causes of testicle pain include: Injury Infection or swelling of the sperm ducts ( epididymitis ) or testicles ( orchitis ) Twisting of the testicles that can cut off the blood supply ( testicular torsion ). It is most common in young men between 10 and 20 years old. It is a medical emergency that needs to be treated as soon as possible. If surgery is performed within 6 hours, most testicles can be saved. Mild pain may be caused by fluid collection in the scrotum, such as: Enlarged veins in the scrotum ( varicocele ) Cyst in the epididymis that often contains dead sperm cells ( spermatocele ) Fluid surrounding the testicle ( hydrocele ) Pain in the testicles may also be caused by a hernia or kidney stone. Testicular cancer  is almost always painless. But any testicle lump should be checked out by your health care provider, whether or not there is pain. Home Care 
 
 Non-urgent causes of testicle pain, such as minor injuries and fluid collection, can often be treated with home care. The following steps may reduce discomfort and swelling: Provide support to the scrotum by wearing an athletic supporter. Apply ice to the scrotum. Take warm baths if there are signs of swelling. While lying down, place a rolled towel under your scrotum. Try over-the-counter pain relievers, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Do NOT give aspirin to children. Preventive measures to take: Prevent injury by wearing an athletic supporter during contact sports. Follow safe sex practices. If you are diagnosed with chlamydia or another STD, all of your sexual partners need to be checked to see if they are infected. Make sure that children have received the MMR (mumps, measles, and rubella) vaccine. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Sudden, severe testicle pain needs immediate medical care. Call your provider right away or go to an emergency room if: Your pain is severe or sudden You have had an injury or trauma to the scrotum, and you still have pain or swelling after 1 hour Your pain is accompanied by nausea or vomiting Also call your provider right away if: You feel a lump in the scrotum You have a fever Your scrotum is warm, tender to the touch, or red You have been in contact with someone who has the mumps What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will do an exam of your groin, testicles, and abdomen. Your provider will ask you questions about the pain such as:  How long have you had testicular pain? Did it start suddenly or slowly? Is one side higher than usual? Where do you feel the pain? Is it on one or both sides? How bad is the pain? Is it constant or does it come and go? Does the pain reach into your abdomen or back? Have you had any injuries? Have you ever had an infection spread by sexual contact? Do you have any other symptoms like swelling, redness, change in the color of your urine, fever, or unexpected weight loss? The following tests may be performed: Ultrasound  of the testicles Urinalysis  and urine cultures Testing of prostate secretions Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - testicle; Orchalgia; Epididymitis; Orchitis Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testis and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132.  Montgomery JS, Bloom DA. The diagnosis and management of scrotal masses.  Med Clin North Am . 2011;95:235-244. PMID: 21095426  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 21095426 . Trojian TH, Lishnak TS, Heiman D. Epididymitis and orchitis: an overview.  Am Fam Physician . 2009;79(7). PMID: 19378875  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19378875 . Wampler SM, Llanes M. Common scrotal and testicular problems.  Prim Care . 2010;37:613-626. PMID: 20705202  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 20705202 . Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Scrotum 
 Testes 
 Testicle lump 
 Testicular cancer 
 Testicular torsion 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia