
 Testosterone 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A testosterone test measures the amount of the male hormone, testosterone, in the blood. Both men and women produce this hormone. The test described in this article measures the total amount of testosterone in the blood. Much of the testosterone in the blood is bound to a protein called sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Another blood test can measure the "free" testosterone. However, this type of test is often not very accurate.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is taken from a vein. The best time for the blood sample to be taken is between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m. A second sample is often needed to confirm a result that is lower than expected.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 The health care provider may advise you to stop taking medicines that may affect the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a slight prick or sting when the needle is inserted. There may be some throbbing afterward. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done if you have symptoms of abnormal male hormone (androgen) production. In males, the testicles produce most of the testosterone in the body. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of abnormal testosterone such as: Early or late puberty (in boys) Infertility, erectile dysfunction, low level of sexual interest, infertility,  thinning of the bones  (in men)  In females, the ovaries produce most of the testosterone. The adrenal glands can also produce too much of other androgens that are converted to testosterone. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of higher testosterone levels, such as: Acne, oily skin Change in voice Decreased breast size Excess hair growth (thick, dark hair in the area of the moustache, beard, sideburns, chest, buttocks, inner thighs) Increased size of the clitoris Irregular or absent menstrual periods Male-pattern baldness or hair thinning  Normal Results 
 
 Normal measurements for these tests: Male: 300 to 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) or 10.41 to 34.70 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) Female: 15 to 70 ng/dL or 0.52 to 2.43 nmol/L The examples above are common measurements for results for these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to  low testosterone . Testosterone level also naturally drops with age. Low testosterone can affect sex drive, mood, and the body in men. Decreased total testosterone may be due to: Chronic illness The pituitary gland does not produce  normal amounts of some or all of its hormones Problem with areas of the brain that control hormones Low thyroid function Delayed puberty Diseases of the testicles (trauma, cancer, infection, immune) Benign tumor of the pituitary cells that produce too much of the hormone prolactin Too much body fat (obesity) Increased total testosterone level may be due to: Resistance to the action of male hormones (androgen resistance) Tumor of the ovaries Cancer of the testes Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Taking medications or drugs that increase testosterone level Alternative Names 
 
 Serum testosterone References 
 
 Rosenfield RL, Barnes RB, Ehrmann DA. Hyperandrogenism, hirsuitism, and polycystic ovary syndrome. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 133. Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male sexual function. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 234. Read More 
 
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Polycystic ovary syndrome 
 Precocious puberty 
 Prolactinoma 
 Testicular cancer 
 Testicular failure 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hormones 
 Men's Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia