
 Testicular failure 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Testicular failure occurs when the  testicles  cannot produce sperm or male hormones. Causes 
 
 Testicular failure is uncommon. Causes include: Certain medicines, including glucocorticoids, ketoconazole, chemotherapy, and opioid pain medicines Diseases that affect the testicle, including  hemochromatosis ,  mumps ,  orchitis , and  testicular cancer Injury or trauma to the testicles Testicular torsion  and  varicocele Obesity Other diseases, such as  cystic fibrosis The following can increase the risk of testicular failure: Activities that cause constant, low-level injury to the  scrotum , such as riding a motorcycle or bicycle Frequent and heavy use of  marijuana Undescended testicles  at birth Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Decrease in height Enlarged breasts  (gynecomastia) Infertility Loss of muscle mass Lack of sex drive (libido) Loss of armpit and pubic hair Slow development or lack of secondary male sex characteristics (hair growth, scrotum enlargement, penis enlargement, voice changes) Men may also notice they do not need to shave as often. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show: Genitals that do not clearly look either male or female (usually found during infancy) Abnormally small, firm testicles Tumor or an abnormal mass in the testicle or the scrotum Other tests may show low bone mineral density and fractures. Blood tests may show a low level of  testosterone  and high levels of prolactin,  FSH , and  LH . Your doctor may also order a  semen analysis  to examine the number of healthy sperm you are producing. Sometimes, an ultrasound of the testes will be ordered. Testicular failure and low testosterone level may be hard to diagnose in older men because testosterone levels normally decrease slowly with age. Treatment 
 
 Male hormone supplements may treat some forms of testicular failure. Men who take testosterone replacement therapy need to be carefully monitored by a doctor. Testosterone may cause the following: Excess growth of the prostate gland Abnormal increase in red blood cells Changes in blood cholesterol Changes in sleep and mood Avoiding the medicine or activity that is causing the problem may bring testicle function back to normal. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many forms of testicular failure cannot be reversed. Hormone replacement therapy can help reverse symptoms, although it may not restore fertility. Possible Complications 
 
 Testicular failure that begins before puberty will stop normal body growth. It can prevent adult male characteristics (such as deep voice and beard) from developing. This can be treated with testosterone therapy. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms of testicular failure.  Prevention 
 
 Avoid higher-risk activities if possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Primary hypogonadism - male Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Allan CA, McLachlan RI. Androgen deficiency disorders. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al., eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 139. Basaria S. Male hypogonadism.  Lancet . 2014;383:1250-63. PMID: 24119423  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24119423 . Graybill SD, Vigersky RA. Male hypogonadism. In: McDermott MT, ed.  Endocrine Secrets . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Mumps 
 Scrotum 
 Substance use 
 Testes 
 Testicular cancer 
 Testicular torsion 
 Undescended testicle 
 
 Review Date 4/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia