
 Tetanus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tetanus is an infection of the nervous system with a type of bacteria that is potentially deadly, called  Clostridium tetani (C tetani) . Causes 
 
 Spores  of the bacteria  C tetani  are found in the soil, and in animal feces and mouth (gastrointestinal tract). In the spore form,  C tetani  can remain inactive in the soil. But it can remain infectious for more than 40 years. You can get tetanus infection when the spores enter your body through an injury or wound. The spores become active bacteria that spread in the body and make a poison called tetanus toxin (also known as tetanospasmin). This poison blocks nerve signals from your spinal cord to your muscles, causing severe muscle spasms. The spasms can be so powerful that they tear the muscles or cause  fractures  of the spine. The time between infection and the first sign of symptoms is about 7 to 21 days. Most cases of tetanus in the United States occur in those who have not been properly vaccinated against the disease. Symptoms 
 
 Tetanus often begins with mild spasms in the jaw muscles (lockjaw). The spasms can also affect your chest, neck, back, and  abdominal muscles . Back muscle spasms often cause arching, called  opisthotonos . Sometimes, the spasms affect muscles that help with breathing, which can lead to breathing problems. Prolonged muscular action causes sudden, powerful, and painful contractions of muscle groups. This is called tetany. These are the episodes that can cause fractures and muscle tears. Other symptoms include: Drooling Excessive sweating Fever Hand or foot spasms Irritability 
  Swallowing difficulty
   Uncontrolled urination or defecation  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history. No specific lab test is available to diagnose tetanus. Tests may be used to rule out  meningitis ,  rabies , strychnine poisoning, and other diseases with similar symptoms. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include: Antibiotics Bedrest with a calm environment (dim light, reduced noise, and stable temperature) Medicine to reverse the poison (tetanus immune globulin) Muscle relaxers, such as diazepam Sedatives Surgery to clean the wound and remove the source of the poison (debridement) Breathing support with oxygen, a breathing tube, and a breathing machine may be necessary. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, 1 out of 4 infected people die. The death rate for newborns with untreated tetanus is even higher. With proper treatment, less than 15% of infected people die. Wounds on the head or face seem to be more dangerous than those on other parts of the body. If the person survives the  acute  illness, recovery is generally complete. Uncorrected episodes of  hypoxia  (lack of oxygen) caused by muscle spasms in the throat may lead to irreversible brain damage. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result from tetanus include: Airway obstruction Respiratory arrest Heart failure Pneumonia Damage to muscles Fractures
    Brain damage due to lack of oxygen during spasms When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you have an  open wound , particularly if: You are injured outdoors. The wound has been in contact with soil. You have not received a tetanus booster (vaccine) within 5 years or you are not sure of your vaccination status. Call for an appointment with your provider if you have never been immunized against tetanus as an adult or child. Also call if your children have not been immunized, or if you are unsure of your tetanus immunization (vaccine) status. Prevention 
 
 IMMUNIZATION Tetanus is completely preventable by being immunized (vaccinated). Immunization usually protects against tetanus infection for 10 years. In the United States, immunizations begin in infancy with the  DTaP  series of shots. The DTaP vaccine is a 3-in-1 vaccine that protects against  diphtheria ,  pertussis , and tetanus. Td vaccine  or  Tdap vaccine  is used to maintain immunity in those age 7 and older. Tdap vaccine should be given once, before age 65, as a substitute for Td for those who have not had Tdap. Td boosters are recommended every 10 years starting at age 19. Older teenagers and adults who get injuries, especially puncture-type wounds, should get a tetanus booster if it has been more than 10 years since the last booster. If you have been injured outside or in any way that makes contact with soil likely, contact your provider about your risk of getting a tetanus infection. Injuries and wounds should be thoroughly cleaned right away. If the tissue of the wound is dying, a doctor will need to remove the tissue. You may have heard that you can get tetanus if you are injured by a rusty nail. This is true only if the nail is dirty and has the tetanus bacteria on it. It is the dirt on the nail, not the rust that carries the risk of tetanus. Alternative Names 
 
 Lockjaw; Trismus References 
 
 Hodowanec A, Bleck TP. Tetanus ( Clostridium tetani ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 246. Roper MH, Wassilak SGF, Tiwari TSP, Orenstein WA. Tetanus toxoid. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, Offit PA, eds.  Vaccines . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 33. Simon BC, Hern HG. Wound management principles. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Broken bone 
 Central nervous system 
 Cuts and puncture wounds 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Muscle cramps 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Seizures 
 Spores 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tetanus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia