
 Thalassemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thalassemia is a blood disorder passed down through families (inherited) in which the body makes an abnormal form of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen. The disorder results in large numbers of red blood cells being destroyed, which leads to anemia. Causes 
 
 Hemoglobin is made of 2 proteins:  Alpha globin Beta globin  Thalassemia occurs when there is a defect in a gene that helps control production of 1 of these proteins. There are 2 main types of thalassemia: Alpha thalassemia occurs when a gene or genes related to the alpha globin protein are missing or changed (mutated). Beta thalassemia occurs when similar gene defects affect production of the beta globin protein.  Alpha thalassemias occur most often in people from Southeast Asia, the Middle East, China, and in those of African descent. Beta thalassemias occur most often in people of Mediterranean origin. To a lesser extent, Chinese, other Asians, and African Americans can be affected. There are many forms of thalassemia. Each type has many different subtypes. Both alpha and beta thalassemia include the following 2 forms: Thalassemia major Thalassemia minor  You must inherit the gene defect from both parents to develop thalassemia major. Thalassemia minor occurs if you receive the faulty gene from only 1 parent. People with this form of the disorder are carriers of the disease. Most of the time, they do not have symptoms. Beta thalassemia major is also called Cooley anemia. Risk factors for thalassemia include: Asian, Chinese, Mediterranean, or African American ethnicity Family history of the disorder  Symptoms 
 
 The most severe form of alpha thalassemia major causes  stillbirth  (death of the unborn baby during birth or the late stages of pregnancy). Children born with beta thalassemia major (Cooley anemia) are normal at birth, but develop severe  anemia  during the first year of life. Other symptoms can include: Bone deformities in the face Fatigue Growth failure Shortness of breath Yellow skin (jaundice)  People with the minor form of alpha and beta thalassemia have small red blood cells but no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to look for an enlarged spleen. A blood sample will be sent to a laboratory to be tested. Red blood cells will appear small and abnormally shaped when looked at under a microscope. A  complete blood count (CBC)  reveals anemia. A test called hemoglobin electrophoresis shows the presence of an abnormal form of hemoglobin. A test called mutational analysis can help detect alpha thalassemia.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment for thalassemia major often involves regular blood transfusions and folate supplements. If you receive blood transfusions, you should not take iron supplements. Doing so can cause a high amount of iron to build up in the body, which can be harmful. People who receive a lot of blood transfusions need a treatment called chelation therapy. This is done to remove excess iron from the body. A bone marrow transplant may help treat the disease in some people, especially children. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Severe thalassemia can cause early death (between ages 20 and 30) due to heart failure. Getting regular blood transfusions and therapy to remove iron from the body helps improve the outcome. Less severe forms of thalassemia often do not shorten lifespan. You may want to seek genetic counseling if you have a family history of the condition and are thinking of having children.  Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, thalassemia major leads to heart failure and liver problems. It also makes a person more likely to develop infections.  Blood transfusions can help control some symptoms, but carry a risk of side effects from too much iron. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You or your child has symptoms of thalassemia. You are being treated for the disorder and new symptoms develop.  Alternative Names 
 
 Mediterranean anemia; Cooley anemia; Beta thalassemia; Alpha thalassemia Images 
 
 
 Thalassemia major 
 Thalassemia minor 
 References 
 
 Cappellini MD. The thalassemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 162. DeBaun MR, Frei-Jones MJ, Vichinsky EP. Hemoglobinopatiies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 462. Giardina PJ, Rivella S. Thalassemia syndromes. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hemoglobin 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thalassemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia