
 Thiamin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thiamin is one of the B vitamins. The B vitamins are a group of water-soluble vitamins that are part of many of the chemical reactions in the body. Function 
 
 Thiamin (vitamin B1) helps the body's cells change carbohydrates into energy. The main role of carbohydrates is to provide energy for the body, especially the brain and nervous system Thiamin also plays a role in muscle contraction and conduction of nerve signals. Thiamin is essential for the metabolism of pyruvate. Food Sources 
 
 Thiamin is found in: Enriched, fortified, and whole grain products such as bread, cereals, rice, pasta, and flour Wheat germ Beef liver and pork Dried milk Egg Legumes and peas Nuts and seeds  Dairy products, fruits, and vegetables are not very high in thiamin in small amounts. But when you eat large amounts of these, they become a significant source of thiamin. Side Effects 
 
 A lack of thiamin can cause  weakness ,  fatigue , psychosis, and nerve damage. Thiamin deficiency in the United States is most often seen in people who abuse alcohol (alcoholism). A lot of alcohol makes it hard for the body to absorb thiamin from foods. Unless those with alcoholism receive higher-than-normal amounts of thiamin to make up for the difference, the body will not get enough of the substance. This can lead to a disease called  beriberi . In severe thiamin deficiency, brain damage can occur. One type is called  Korsakoff syndrome . The other is  Wernicke's disease . Either or both of these conditions can occur in the same person. There is no known poisoning linked to thiamin. Recommendations 
 
 The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for vitamins reflect how much of each vitamin most people should get each day. The RDA for vitamins may be used as goals for each person. How much of each vitamin you need depends on your age and gender. Other factors, such as pregnancy and illnesses, are also important. Adults and pregnant or breast-feeding women need higher levels of thiamin than young children. Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin: Infants 0 to 6 months: 0.2* milligrams per day (mg/day) 7 to 12 months: 0.3* mg/day  *Adequate Intake (AI) Children 1 to 3 years: 0.5 mg/day 4 to 8 years: 0.6 mg/day 9 to 13 years: 0.9 mg/day  Adolescents and Adults Males age 14 and older: 1.2 mg/day Females age 14 to 18 years: 1.0 mg/day Females age 19 and older: 1.1 mg/day (1.4 mg needed during pregnancy and lactation)  The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods. Alternative Names 
 
 Vitamin B1; Thiamine Images 
 
 
 Vitamin B1 benefit 
 Vitamin B1 source 
 References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 1998. PMID: 23193625  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23193625 . Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Salwen MJ. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 B Vitamins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia