
 Thioridazine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thioridazine is a prescription medicine used to treat serious mental and emotional disorders, including schizophrenia. Thioridazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Thioridazine Where Found 
 
 These medicines contain thioridazine: Mellaril Melozine Other medicines may also contain thioridazine. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of an overdose of thioridazine in different parts of the body. BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Cannot completely empty the bladder EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Drooling Dry mouth Nasal congestion Swallowing difficulties Ulcers in the mouth, on the tongue, or in the throat Vision color changes (brown tinge) Yellow eyes HEART AND BLOOD Rapid heartbeat High or very low blood pressure MOUTH, STOMACH, AND INTESTINAL TRACT Constipation Loss of appetite Nausea MUSCLES AND BONES Muscle spasms Muscle stiffness Neck or face stiffness NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma Difficulty walking Dizziness Drowsiness Fever Hypothermia  (body temperature is lower than normal) Seizures Tremor Lack of coordination Weakness OTHER Menstrual changes Skin discoloration, bluish  (changing to a purplish color) Home Care 
 
 Get medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxative Medicine (sodium bicarbonate) to help reverse the effect of the poison Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage ) X-rays Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery depends on the amount of damage to the person's body. Survival past 2 days is usually a good sign. The most serious side effects are usually due to damage to the heart. If heart damage can be stabilized, recovery is likely. But if breathing has been depressed for a long period of time before treatment, brain injury may occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Mellaril overdose; Hydrochloride - thioridazine overdose References 
 
 Dershwitz M. Antipsychotics. In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 182. Nockowitz RA, Rund DA. Psychotropic medications. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 290. Wittler MA, Lavonas EJ. Antipsychotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 161. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia