
 Thirst - excessive 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Excessive thirst is an abnormal feeling of always needing to drink fluids. Considerations 
 
 Drinking lots of water is healthy in most cases. But the urge to drink too much may be the result of a physical or emotional disease. Excessive thirst may be a symptom of high blood sugar (hyperglycemia). It can be an important clue in detecting  diabetes . Excessive thirst is a common symptom. It is often the reaction to fluid loss during exercise or to eating salty foods. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: A recent salty or spicy meal Bleeding enough to cause a large decrease in blood volume Diabetes Diabetes insipidus Medicines such as anticholinergics, demeclocycline, diuretics, phenothiazines Loss of body fluids from the bloodstream into the tissues due to conditions such as severe infections ( sepsis ) or burns, or heart, liver, or kidney failure A mental disorder called psychogenic polydipsia  Home Care 
 
 Because thirst is the body's signal to replace water loss, it is most often appropriate to drink plenty of liquids. For thirst caused by diabetes, follow the prescribed treatment to properly control your  blood sugar level When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Excessive thirst is ongoing and unexplained. Thirst is accompanied by other unexplained symptoms, such as blurry vision and fatigue. You are passing more than 5 quarts (4.75 liters) of urine per day.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The health care provider will get your medical history and perform a physical exam. The provider may ask you questions such as:  How long have you been aware of having increased thirst? Did it develop suddenly or slowly? Does your thirst stay the same all day? Did you change your diet? Are you eating more salty or spicy foods? Have you noticed an  increased appetite ? Have you  lost  or  gained weight  without trying? Has your activity level increased? What other symptoms are happening at the same time? Have you recently suffered a burn or other injury? Are you urinating more or less frequently than usual? Are you producing more or less urine than usual? Have you noticed any bleeding? Are you sweating more than usual? Is there any swelling in your body? Do you have a  fever ?  Tests that may be ordered include the following: Blood glucose level CBC  and  blood differential Serum calcium Serum osmolality Serum sodium Urinalysis Urine osmolality Your provider will recommend treatment if needed based on your exam and tests. For example, if tests show you have diabetes, you will need to get treated.  A very strong, constant urge to drink may be the sign of a psychological problem. You may need a psychological evaluation if the provider suspects this is a cause. Your fluid intake and output will be closely watched. Alternative Names 
 
 Increased thirst; Polydipsia; Excessive thirst Images 
 
 
 Insulin production and diabetes 
 References 
 
 Pfennig CL, Slovis CM. Electrolyte disturbances. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 125. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dehydration 
 Diabetes Insipidus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia