
 Thoracic outlet syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thoracic outlet syndrome is a rare condition that involves: Pain in the neck and shoulder Numbness and tingling  of the fingers A weak grip  The thoracic outlet is the area between the ribcage and collarbone. Causes 
 
 Nerves coming from the spine and major blood vessels of the body pass through a narrow space near your shoulder and collarbone on the way to the arms. Sometimes, there is not enough space for the nerves to pass by through the collarbone and upper ribs. Pressure (compression) on these blood vessels or nerves can cause symptoms in the arms or hands.  Pressure may happen if you have:  An extra rib above the first one. An abnormal tight band connecting the spine to the ribs.  People with this syndrome often have injured the area in the past or overused the shoulder. People with long necks and droopy shoulders may be more likely to develop this condition because of extra pressure on the nerves and blood vessels. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome may include: Pain, numbness, and tingling in the pinky and ring fingers, and the inner forearm Pain and tingling in the neck and shoulders (carrying something heavy may make the pain worse) Signs of poor circulation in the hand or forearm (a bluish color, cold hands, or a swollen arm) Weakness of the muscles in the hand Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms.  The following tests may be done to confirm the diagnosis: Electromyography  (EMG) CT angiogram MRI Nerve conduction velocity  study X-ray Tests are also done to rule out other problems, such as  carpal tunnel syndrome  or a damaged nerve due to problems in the neck. Treatment 
 
 Physical therapy is often used to treat thoracic outlet syndrome. It helps:  Make your shoulder muscles stronger Improve your range of motion in the shoulder Promote better posture  Your provider may prescribe pain medicine.  If there is pressure on a vein, your provider may give you a blood thinner to prevent a blood clot.  You may need surgery if physical therapy and changes in activity do not improve your symptoms. The surgeon may make a cut either under your armpit or just above your collarbone. During surgery, the following may be done: An extra rib is removed and certain muscles are cut. A section of the first rib is removed to release pressure in the area. 
   Bypass surgery is done to reroute blood around the compression or remove the area that is causing the symptoms.  Your doctor may also suggest other alternatives, including  angioplasty , if the artery is narrowed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Surgery to remove the extra rib and break up tight fiber bands may ease symptoms in some people. Some people have symptoms that return after surgery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can occur with any surgery, and depend on the type of procedure and anesthesia. Risks related to this surgery include: Damage to nerves or blood vessels, causing muscle weakness Lung collapse  Failure to relieve the symptoms Images 
 
 
 Thoracic outlet anatomy 
 References 
 
 Filler AG. Brachial plexus nerve entrapments and thoracic outlet syndromes. In: Winn HR, ed.  Youmans and Winn Neurological Surgery . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 250. Posner MA, Roach CJ, Owens BD. Vascular problems and thoracic outlet syndrome. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Numbness and tingling 
 
 Review Date 11/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thoracic Outlet Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia