
 Thoracic aortic aneurysm 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An aneurysm is an abnormal widening or ballooning of a portion of an artery due to weakness in the wall of the blood vessel. A thoracic aortic aneurysm occurs in the part of the body's largest artery (the aorta) that passes through the chest. Causes 
 
 The most common cause of a thoracic aortic aneurysm is  hardening of the arteries . This condition is more common in people with high cholesterol, long-term high blood pressure, or who smoke. Other risk factors for a thoracic aneurysm include: Changes caused by age Connective tissue disorders such as  Marfan  or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Inflammation of the aorta Injury from falls or motor vehicle accidents Syphilis  Symptoms 
 
 Aneurysms develop slowly over many years. Most people have no symptoms until the aneurysm begins to leak or expand.  Symptoms often begin suddenly when: The aneurysm grows quickly. The aneurysm tears open (called a rupture). Blood leaks along the wall of the aorta (aortic dissection). If the aneurysm presses on nearby structures, the following symptoms may occur: Hoarseness Swallowing problems High-pitched breathing (stridor) Swelling in the neck Other symptoms may include: Chest or upper back pain Clammy skin Nausea and vomiting Rapid heart rate Sense of impending doom Exams and Tests 
 
 The physical exam is often normal unless a rupture or leak has occurred.  Most thoracic aortic aneurysms are detected on imaging tests performed for other reasons. These tests include chest x-ray, echocardiogram, or  chest CT scan  or MRI. A chest CT scan shows the size of the aorta and the exact location of the aneurysm. An aortogram (a special set of x-ray images made when dye is injected into the aorta) can identify the aneurysm and any branches of the aorta that may be involved. Treatment 
 
 There is a risk that the aneurysm may open up (rupture) if you do not have surgery to repair it. The treatment depends on the location of the aneurysm. The aorta is made of 3 parts: The first part moves upward toward the head. It is called the ascending aorta. The middle part is curved. It is called the aortic arch. The last part moves downward, toward the feet. It is called the descending aorta.  For people with aneurysms of the ascending aorta or aortic arch: Surgery to replace the aorta is recommended if an aneurysm is larger than 5 to 6 centimeters. A cut is made in the middle of the chest bone. The aorta is replaced with a plastic or fabric graft. This is major surgery that requires a heart-lung machine.  For people with aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta: Major surgery is done to replace the aorta with a fabric graft if the aneurysm is larger than 6 centimeters. This surgery is done through a cut on the left side of the chest, which may reach to the abdomen. Endovascular stenting is a less invasive option. A  stent  is a tiny metal or plastic tube that is used to hold an artery open. Stents can be placed into the body without cutting the chest. Not all people with descending thoracic aneurysms are candidates for stenting, however.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The long-term outlook for people with thoracic aortic aneurysm depends on other medical problems, such as heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes. These problems may have caused or contributed to the condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Serious complications after aortic surgery can include: Bleeding Graft infection Heart attack Irregular heartbeat Kidney damage Paralysis Stroke Death soon after the operation occurs in 5% to 10% of people. Complications after aneurysm stenting include damage to the blood vessels supplying the leg, which may require another operation. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Tell your health care provider if you have: A family history of connective tissue disorders (such as Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) Chest or back discomfort  Prevention 
 
 To prevent atherosclerosis: Control your blood pressure and blood lipid levels. DO NOT smoke. Eat a healthy diet. Exercise regularly.  Alternative Names 
 
 Aortic aneurysm - thoracic; Syphilitic aneurysm; Aneurysm - thoracic aortic Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Aortic rupture, chest x-ray 
 References 
 
 Acher CW, Wynn M. Thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysms: open surgical treatment. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 135. Braverman AC. Diseases of the aorta. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 57. Lederle FA. Diseases of the aorta. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 78. Singh MJ, Makaroun MS. Thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysms: endovascular treatment. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 136. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open 
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 High blood pressure 
 Marfan syndrome 
 Stent 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge  
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge 
 Review Date 6/6/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, RPVI, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aortic Aneurysm 
 Browse the Encyclopedia