
 Thromboangiitis obliterans 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thromboangiitis obliterans is a rare disease in which blood vessels of the hands and feet become blocked. Causes 
 
 Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease) is caused by small blood vessels that become inflamed and swollen. The blood vessels then narrow or get blocked by blood clots (thrombosis). Blood vessels of the hands and feet are mostly affected. Arteries are more affected than veins. Average age when symptoms begin is around 35. Women and older adults are affected less often. This condition mostly affects young men ages 20 to 45 who are heavy smokers or chew tobacco. Female smokers in Western countries may also be affected. Many people with this problem have poor dental health, most likely due to tobacco use.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms most often affect 2 or more limbs and may include: Fingers or toes that appear pale, red, or bluish and feel cold to the touch. Sudden severe pain in the hands and feet. The pain may feel like a burning or tingling. Pain in the hands and feet that most often occurs when at rest. The pain may be worse when the hands and feet get cold or during emotional stress. Pain in the legs , ankles, or feet when walking (intermittent claudication). The pain is often located in the arch of the foot. Skin changes or small painful ulcers on the fingers or toes.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may show blockage of blood vessels in the affected hands or feet: Ultrasound of the extremity, called  plethysmography Doppler ultrasound of the extremity Blood tests for other causes of inflamed blood vessels (vasculitis) and blocked (occlusion of) blood vessels may be done. These causes include  diabetes ,  scleroderma , and  atherosclerosis . There are no blood tests that diagnose thromboangiitis obliterans.  A heart echocardiogram may be done to look for sources of blood clots. In rare cases when the diagnosis is unclear, a  biopsy  of the blood vessel is done. Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for thromboangiitis obliterans. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms and prevent the disease from getting worse. Stopping tobacco use of any kind is key to controlling the disease. Smoking cessation treatments are strongly recommended. It is also important to avoid cold temperatures and other conditions that reduce blood flow in the hands and feet. Applying warmth and doing gentle exercises can help increase circulation. Aspirin and medicines that open the blood vessels (vasodilators) may help. In very bad cases, surgery to cut the nerves to the area (surgical sympathectomy) can help control pain. It may become necessary to amputate the fingers or toes if the area becomes very infected and tissue dies. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms of thromboangiitis obliterans may go away if the person stops tobacco use. People who continue to use tobacco may need repeated amputations.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Tissue death ( gangrene ) Amputation of fingers or toes Loss of blood flow in the limb of the affected fingers or toes  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have symptoms of thromboangiitis obliterans. You have thromboangiitis obliterans and symptoms get worse, even with treatment. You develop new symptoms. Prevention 
 
 People with a history of  Raynaud phenomenon  or blue, painful fingers or toes, especially with ulcers, should not use any form of tobacco. Alternative Names 
 
 Buerger disease Images 
 
 
 Thromboangiites obliterans 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Akar AR, Durdu S. Thromboangiitis obliterans. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 79. Stone JH. The systemic vasculitudes. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 270. Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Raynaud phenomenon 
 
 Review Date 7/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Arterial Disease 
 Raynaud's Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia