
 Thrombolytic drugs for heart attack 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Small blood vessels called coronary arteries supply blood and oxygen to the heart. A heart attack can occur if a blood clot stops the flow of blood through one of these arteries. Unstable angina  refers to chest pain and other warning signs that a heart attack may happen soon. It is most often caused by blood clots in the arteries.  Some people may be given drugs to break up the clot if the artery is completely blocked. These drugs are called thrombolytics, or clot-busting drugs. They are only given for a type of  heart attack , where certain changes are noted on the ECG. This type of heart attack is called an ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). These drugs should be given as soon as possible after the chest pain first occurs (most often in less than 12 hours). The medicine is given through a vein (IV). Blood thinners taken by mouth may be prescribed later to prevent more clots from forming.  The main risk when receiving clot-busting drugs is bleeding, especially bleeding in the brain. Thrombolytic therapy is not safe for people who have: Bleeding inside the head or a stroke Brain abnormalities, such as tumors or poorly-formed blood vessels Had a head injury within the past 3 months A history of using blood thinners or a bleeding disorder Had major surgery, a major injury, or internal bleeding within the past 3 to 4 weeks Peptic ulcer  disease Severe high blood pressure  Other treatments to open blocked or narrowed vessels that may be done in place of or along with thrombolytic therapy include: Angioplasty Heart bypass surgery Alternative Names 
 
 Myocardial infarction - thrombolytic; MI - thrombolytic; ST - elevation myocardial infarction; CAD - thrombolytic; Coronary artery disease - thrombolytic; STEMI - thrombolytic References 
 
 Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Ganiats TG, Holmes DR Jr, Jaffe AS, Jneid H, Kelly RF, Kontos MC, Levine GN, Liebson PR, Mukherjee D, Peterson ED, Sabatine MS, Smalling RW, Zieman SJ. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139-228. PMID: 25260718  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25260718 .  O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE Jr, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78-140. PMID: 23256913  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23256913 .  
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Attack 
 Browse the Encyclopedia