
 Thrombophlebitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thrombophlebitis is swelling (inflammation) of a vein. A  blood clot  (thrombus) in the vein can cause this swelling. Causes 
 
 Thrombophlebitis may affect  deeper, larger veins  or  veins near the skin surface . Most of the time, it occurs in the pelvis and legs. Blood clots may form when something slows or changes the flow of blood in the veins. Risk factors include: A pacemaker catheter that has been passed through the vein in the groin Bed rest or sitting in one position for too long such as plane travel Family history of blood clots Fractures in the pelvis or legs Giving birth within the last 6 months Pregnancy Obesity Recent surgery (most commonly hip, knee, or female pelvic surgery) Too many blood cells being made by the bone marrow, causing the blood to be thicker than normal (polycythemia vera) Having an indwelling (long-term) catheter in a blood vessel Blood is more likely to clot in someone who has certain problems or disorders, such as: Cancer Certain autoimmune disorders, such as lupus Cigarette smoking Conditions that make it more likely to develop blood clots Taking estrogens or birth control pills (this risk is even higher with smoking) Symptoms 
 
 The following symptoms are often associated with thrombophlebitis: Swelling in the part of the body affected Pain in the part of the body affected Skin redness  (not always present) Warmth and tenderness over the vein Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can usually diagnose the condition based on how the affected area looks. Your provider will frequently check your  vital signs . This is to make sure you don't have complications. If the cause cannot be easily identified, 1 or more of the following tests may be done: Blood coagulation studies Doppler ultrasound Venography Treatment 
 
 Support stockings and wraps can help to reduce discomfort. Your provider may prescribe medicines such as: 
   Painkillers
    
   Blood thinners to prevent new clots from forming, most often only prescribed when deep veins are involved
    
   Medicines such as ibuprofen to reduce pain and swelling
    
   Medicines injected into the vein to dissolve an existing clot
    You may be told to do the following: 
   Keep pressure off the area to reduce pain and decrease the risk of further damage.
    
   Raise the affected area to reduce  swelling .
    Rare treatment options are: Surgical removal of a vein near the surface Vein stripping Bypass of the vein Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt treatment can treat thrombophlebitis and its other forms. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of thrombosis include: 
Blood clot in the lungs ( pulmonary embolism )
   Chronic pain Swelling in the leg When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of thrombophlebitis. Call your provider right away if: Your symptoms do not improve with treatment. Your symptoms get worse. New symptoms occur (such as an entire limb becoming  pale , cold, or swollen). Prevention 
 
 Routine changing of  intravenous  (IV) lines helps to prevent thrombophlebitis related to IVs. If you are taking a long car or plane trip: Walk or stretch your legs once in a while Drink plenty of liquids Wear support hose If you are hospitalized, your provider may prescribe medicine to prevent thrombophlebitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Phlebitis; Deep vein thrombosis - thrombophlebitis Images 
 
 
 Deep venous thrombosis, iliofemoral 
 Venous blood clot 
 References 
 
 Ginsberg JS. Peripheral venous disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 81. Poi MJ, Lin PH. Deep venous thrombosis. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:963-967. Rathbun S. Superficial thrombophlebitis. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 54. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Deep vein thrombosis 
 Lymphangitis  
 Superficial thrombophlebitis 
 
 Review Date 1/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Clots 
 Browse the Encyclopedia