
 Thrush - children and adults 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thrush is a yeast infection of the tongue and lining of the mouth.  Causes 
 
 Certain germs normally live in our bodies. This includes bacteria and fungi. While most germs are harmless, some can cause infection under certain conditions.  Thrush occurs in children and adults when conditions permit too much growth of a fungus called candida in your mouth. A small amount of this fungus normally lives in your mouth. It is most often kept in check by your immune system and other germs that also live in your mouth. When your immune system is weak or when normal bacteria die, too much of the fungus can grow.  You are more likely to get thrush if: You are in poor health. You are very old. Young babies are also more likely to develop thrush. You have HIV or  AIDS . You are receiving  chemotherapy  or drugs that weaken the immune system. You are taking steroid medicine, including some inhalers for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). You have  diabetes mellitus  and your blood sugar is high. When your blood sugar is high, some of the extra sugar is found in your saliva and acts as food for candida. You take antibiotics. Antibiotics kill some of the healthy bacteria that keep candida from growing too much. Your dentures do not fit well.  Candida can also cause yeast infections in the vagina.  Thrush in newborns  is somewhat common and easy to treat.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of thrush include: White, velvety sores in the mouth and on the tongue Some bleeding when you brush your teeth or scrape the sores Pain when swallowing Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider or dentist can usually diagnose thrush by looking at your mouth and tongue. The sores are easy to recognize. To confirm you have thrush, your provider may: Take a sample of a  mouth sore  by gently scraping it Examine mouth scrapings under a microscope  In severe cases, thrush can grow in your esophagus as well. The esophagus is the tube that connects your mouth to your stomach. If this occurs, your provider may: Take a throat culture to see what germs are causing your thrush Examine your esophagus and stomach with a flexible, lighted scope with a camera on the end  Treatment 
 
 If you get mild thrush after taking antibiotics, eat yogurt or take over-the-counter acidophilus pills. This may help restore a healthy balance of germs in your mouth. For a more severe case of thrush, your doctor may prescribe: Antifungal mouthwash (nystatin). Lozenges (clotrimazole). Antifungal medicines taken as a pill or syrup, these medicines include fluconazole (Diflucan) or itraconazole (Sporanox).  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Oral thrush can be cured. However, if your immune system is weak, thrush may come back or cause more serious problems.  Possible Complications 
 
 If your immune system is weakened, candida can spread throughout your body, causing a serious infection. This infection might affect your: Brain ( meningitis ) Esophagus (esophagitis) Eyes ( endophthalmitis ) Heart ( endocarditis ) Joints ( arthritis )  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have thrush-like sores. You have pain or difficulty swallowing. You have symptoms of thrush and you are HIV positive, receiving chemotherapy, or you take medicines to suppress your immune system.  Prevention 
 
 If you get thrush often, your provider may recommend taking antifungal medicine on a regular basis to keep thrush from coming back. If you have diabetes mellitus, you can help prevent thrush by keeping good control of your blood sugar levels. Alternative Names 
 
 Candidiasis - oral; Oral thrush; Fungal infection - mouth; Candida - oral Images 
 
 
 Candida, fluorescent stain 
 Mouth anatomy 
 References 
 
 Edwards JE Jr. Candida species. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 258. Kauffman CA. Candidiasis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 338. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Endocarditis 
 Endophthalmitis 
 Esophagitis 
 Meningitis 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mouth Disorders 
 Yeast Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia