
 Thyroid storm 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thyroid storm is a very rare, but life-threatening condition of the thyroid gland that develops in cases of untreated thyrotoxicosis ( hyperthyroidism , or overactive thyroid). The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle. Causes 
 
 Thyroid storm occurs due to a major stress such as trauma,  heart attack , or infection. In rare cases, thyroid storm can be caused by treatment of hyperthyroidism with radioiodine therapy. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are severe and may include any of the following: Agitation Change in alertness (consciousness) Confusion Diarrhea Increased temperature Pounding heart ( tachycardia ) Restlessness Shaking Sweating Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may suspect thyrotoxic storm based on: A high systolic (top number) blood pressure reading and a low diastolic (bottom number) blood pressure reading may be low An increased heart rate Blood tests are done to check thyroid hormones  TSH , free T4 and  T3 . Other blood tests are done to check heart and kidney functions and to check for infection. Treatment 
 
 Less severe forms of thyroid storm can be managed well with supportive measures, such as giving oxygen and fluids in case of difficult breathing or dehydration. Treatment may include any of the following: Cooling blankets to return the body temperature to normal Monitoring any excess fluid in older people with heart or kidney disease Medicines to manage agitation Vitamins and glucose The final goal of treatment is to decrease the levels of thyroid hormones in the blood. Sometimes, iodine or other drugs may be given to lower the hormone level in the blood. Antibiotics are given in case of infection. Possible Complications 
 
 Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias) may occur.  Heart failure  and  pulmonary edema  can develop rapidly and cause death. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This is an emergency condition. Call 911 or another emergency number if you have hyperthyroidism and experience symptoms of thyroid storm. Prevention 
 
 To prevent thyroid storm, hyperthyroidism should be treated. Alternative Names 
 
 Thyrotoxic storm; Hyperthyroid storm; Accelerated hyperthyroidism; Thyroid crisis; Thyrotoxicosis - thyroid storm Images 
 
 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Thyrotoxic storm. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:1223.e3-1223.e3. Marino M, Vitti P, Chiovato L. Grave's disease. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Krester DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 82. Sharma AN, Levy DL. Thyroid and adrenal disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 128. Read More 
 
 Agitation 
 Fever 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Sweating 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia