
 Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis is a condition in which there are episodes of  muscle weakness . It occurs in people who have high levels of thyroid hormone in their blood ( hyperthyroidism , thyrotoxicosis). Causes 
 
 This is a rare condition that occurs only in people with high thyroid hormone levels (thyrotoxicosis). It is common in Asian and Hispanic men. There is a similar disorder, called  hypokalemic , or familial, periodic paralysis. It is an inherited condition and not related to high thyroid levels. Risk factors include a family history of periodic paralysis and hyperthyroidism. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms involve attacks of muscle weakness or  paralysis .The attacks alternate with periods of normal muscle function. Attacks often begin after symptoms of hyperthyroidism have developed. The frequency of attacks varies from daily to yearly. Episodes of muscle weakness may last for a few hours or several days. The weakness or paralysis: Comes and goes Can last for up to several days Is more common in the legs than the arms Is most common in the shoulders and hips Is triggered by heavy, high-carbohydrate, high-salt meals Is triggered during rest after exercise Other rare symptoms may include any of the following: Difficulty breathing Speech difficulty Swallowing difficulty Vision changes People are alert during attacks and can answer questions. Normal strength returns between attacks. Muscle weakness may develop over time with repeated attacks. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism include: Excessive sweating  Fast heart rate Fatigue Headache Heat intolerance Increased appetite Insomnia More frequent bowel movements Sensation of feeling a strong heartbeat ( palpitations ) Tremors of the hand Warm, moist skin Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may suspect thyrotoxic periodic paralysis based on: 
  Abnormal thyroid  hormone levels A family history of the disorder
   Low potassium level during attacks
   Symptoms that come and go in episodes  Diagnosis involves ruling out disorders associated with low potassium. The provider may try to trigger an attack by giving you insulin and sugar (glucose, which reduces potassium level) or thyroid hormone. The following signs may be seen during the attack: 
Decreased or no reflexes
 
Heart  arrhythmias 
Low potassium in the bloodstream ( serum potassium  levels are normal between attacks)
   Between attacks, the examination is normal. Or, there may be signs of hyperthyroidism, such as an enlarged thyroid changes in the eyes, tremor, hair and nail changes. The following tests are used to diagnose hyperthyroidism: High thyroid hormone levels ( T3  or  T4 ) Low serum  TSH (thyroid stimulating hormone) levels Thyroid uptake and scan Other test results: Abnormal electrocardiogram ( ECG ) during attacks Abnormal electromyogram ( EMG ) during attacks Low serum potassium during attacks, but normal between attacks  A  muscle biopsy  may sometimes be taken. Treatment 
 
 Potassium should also be given during the attack, usually by mouth. If weakness is severe, you may need to get potassium through a vein ( intravenously ). Note: You should only get intravenous potassium if your kidney function is normal and you are monitored in the hospital. Weakness that involves the muscles used for breathing or swallowing is an emergency. People must be taken to a hospital. Serious  irregularity of heartbeat  may also occur during attacks. Your provider may recommend a diet that is low in carbohydrates and salt to prevent attacks. Medicines called beta-blockers may reduce the number and severity of attacks while your hyperthyroidism is brought under control. Acetazolamide is effective at preventing attacks in people with  familial periodic paralysis . It is usually not effective for thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If an attack isn't treated and the breathing muscles are affected, death can occur. Chronic  attacks over time can lead to muscle weakness. This weakness can continue even between attacks if the thyrotoxicosis is not treated. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis responds well to treatment. Treating hyperthyroidism will prevent attacks and may even reverse muscle weakness. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated thyrotoxic periodic paralysis can lead to: Difficulty breathing, speaking, or swallowing during attacks (rare) Heart arrhythmias during attacks Muscle weakness that gets worse over time When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to the emergency room if you have periods of muscle weakness. This is especially important if you have a family history of periodic paralysis or thyroid disorders. Emergency symptoms include: 
Difficulty breathing, speaking, or swallowing
    Falls due to muscle weakness
    Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be advised. Treating the thyroid disorder prevents attacks of weakness. Alternative Names 
 
 Periodic paralysis - thyrotoxic Images 
 
 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky K, Larsen R, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Ferri FF. Hyperthyroidism. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:672-673. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Carbohydrates 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis 
 Muscle cramps 
 Muscle function loss 
 Potassium test 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia