
 Tick bite 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ticks are bugs that can attach to you as you brush past bushes, plants, and grass. Once on you, ticks often move to a warm, moist place on your body, like the armpits, groin, and hair. There, they typically attach firmly to your skin and begin to draw blood. Avoiding ticks is important because they can infect you with bacteria that cause illness. Ticks can be fairly large, about the size of a pencil eraser, or so small that they are almost impossible to see. There are about 850 different types of ticks. Most tick bites are harmless, but some can cause mild to serious health conditions. This article describes the effects of a tick bite. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage a tick bite. If you or someone you are with is bitten by a tick, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Hard- and soft-bodied female ticks are believed to make a poison that can cause  tick paralysis  in children. Most ticks do not carry diseases, but some carry bacteria that can cause: Colorado tick fever Lyme disease Rocky Mountain spotted fever Tularemia These and other illnesses may cause heart, nervous system, kidney, adrenal gland, and liver damage, and may cause death. Where Found 
 
 Ticks live in wooded areas or grassy fields. Symptoms 
 
 Watch for symptoms of tick-borne diseases in the weeks after a tick bite. These include muscle or joint aches, stiff neck, headache, weakness, fever, swollen lymph nodes, and other flu-like symptoms. Watch for a red spot or rash starting at the site of the bite. The symptoms below are from the bite itself, not from the diseases a bite may cause. Some of the symptoms are caused by one variety of tick or another, but may not be common to all ticks. Stopped breathing Difficulty breathing Blisters Rash Severe pain at site lasting several weeks (from some kinds of ticks) Swelling at site (from some kinds of ticks) Weakness Uncoordinated movement Home Care 
 
 Remove the tick . Be careful not to leave the tick's head stuck in the skin. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Time the tick bite occurred Part of the body affected  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The symptoms will be treated. Long-term treatment may be needed if complications develop. Preventive antibiotics are often given to people who live in areas where Lyme disease is common. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most tick bites are harmless. The outcome will depend on what type of infection the tick may have been carrying and how soon appropriate treatment was started. If you are bitten by a tick that carried a disease and you were not treated correctly, long-term health effects may occur months or even years later. Images 
 
 
 Lyme disease, erythema migrans 
 Lyme disease organism, Borrelia burgdorferi 
 Deer ticks 
 Ticks 
 Tick, deer engorged on the skin 
 Lyme disease - Borrelia burgdorferi organism 
 Tick, deer - adult female 
 Deer and dog tick 
 Tick imbedded in the skin 
 References 
 
 Bryant K. Tickborne infections. In: Long SS, ed.  Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 92. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. Traub SJ, Cummins GA. Tick-borne diseases. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 51. 
 Review Date 7/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia