
 Toilet bowl cleaners and deodorizers poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toilet bowl cleaners and deodorizers are substances used to clean and remove odors from toilets. Poisoning may occur if someone swallows toilet bowl cleaner or deodorizer. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substances in these products that can be harmful are: Detergents Isopropyl alcohol Phenol Where Found 
 
 There are many types of toilet cleaners and deodorizers available. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of this type of poisoning in different parts of the body. BLOOD Severe change in blood acid level (can lead to organ damage)  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns in the food pipe (esophagus) Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly 
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in the product) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty) SKIN Burns Holes in the skin or tissues under the skin Irritation NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma (decreased level of consciousness and lack of consciousness) Headache Seizures Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the product is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the product, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the product, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much of the product they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Toilet bowl cleaners and deodorizers can cause extensive damage in the: Mouth Stomach Throat The outcome will depend on the extent of this damage. Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, or stomach. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection.  If the product gets in the eye, sores may develop in the cornea, the clear part of the eye. This can cause blindness. References 
 
 Wax PM, Yarema M. Corrosives. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 98. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Household Products 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia