
 Tonsillitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tonsillitis is inflammation (swelling) of the tonsils. Causes 
 
 The tonsils are lymph nodes in the back of the mouth and top of the throat. They help to filter out bacteria and other germs to prevent infection in the body. A bacterial or viral infection can cause tonsillitis. Strep throat is a common cause.  The infection may also be seen in other parts of the throat. One such infection is called  pharyngitis. Tonsillitis is very common in children. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms may be: Difficulty swallowing Ear pain Fever  and chills Headache Sore throat, which lasts longer than 48 hours and may be severe Tenderness of the jaw and throat  Other problems or symptoms that may occur are: Problems breathing, if the tonsils are very large Problems eating or drinking  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look in the mouth and throat.  The tonsils may be red and may have white spots on them. The lymph nodes in the jaw and neck may be swollen and tender to the touch.  A  rapid strep test  can be done in most doctors' offices. However, this test may be normal, and you can still have strep. Your provider may send the throat swab to a laboratory for a  strep culture . Test results can take a few days.  Treatment 
 
 Swollen tonsils that are not painful or do not cause other problems do not need to be treated. Your provider may not give you antibiotics. You may be asked to come back for a checkup later. If tests show you do have strep, your doctor will give you antibiotics. It is important to finish all of your antibiotics as directed, even if you feel better. If you do not take them all, the infection can return.  The following tips may help your throat feel better:  Drink cold liquids or suck on fruit-flavored frozen bars. Drink fluids, and mostly warm (not hot), bland fluids. Gargle with warm salt water. Suck on lozenges (containing benzocaine or similar ingredients) to reduce pain (these should not be used in young children because of the choking risk). Take over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen to reduce pain and fever. DO NOT give a child aspirin. Aspirin has been linked to  Reye syndrome .  Some people who have repeated infections may need surgery to remove the tonsils ( tonsillectomy ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Tonsillitis symptoms due to strep will often get better within 2 or 3 days after you start the antibiotics. Children with strep throat should be kept home from school or day care until they have been on antibiotics for 24 hours. This helps reduce the spread of illness. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications from strep throat may be severe. They may include: Abscess in the area around the tonsils Kidney disease caused by strep Rheumatic fever  and other heart problems  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if there is: Excess drooling in a young child Fever, especially 101°F (38.3°C) or higher Pus in the back of the throat Red rash that feels rough, and increased redness in the skin folds Severe problems swallowing or breathing Tender or swollen lymph glands in the neck  Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Throat anatomy 
 Strep throat 
 References 
 
 Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis . 2012;55(10):e86-e102. PMID: 23091044  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23091044 .  van Driel ML, De Sutter AIM, Keber N, Habraken H, Christiaens T. Different antibiotic treatments for group A streptococcal pharyngitis.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2013;4:CD004406. PMID: 23633318  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23633318 .  Wetmore RF. Tonsils and adenoids. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 375.  Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Common cold 
 Dehydration 
 Peritonsillar abscess 
 Pharyngitis - sore throat 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 Rheumatic fever 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Tonsil and adenoid removal - discharge 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tonsillitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia