
 Total anomalous pulmonary venous return 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is a heart disease in which the 4 veins that take blood from the lungs to the heart do not attach normally to the left atrium (left upper chamber of the heart). Instead, they attach to another blood vessel or the wrong part of the heart. It is present at birth ( congenital heart disease ).  Causes 
 
 The cause of total anomalous pulmonary venous return is unknown. In normal circulation, blood is sent from the right ventricle to pick up oxygen in the lungs. It then returns through the pulmonary (lung) veins to the left side of the heart, which sends blood out through the aorta and around the body. In TAPVR, oxygen-rich blood returns from the lungs to the right atrium or to a vein flowing into the right atrium, instead of the left side of heart. In other words, blood simply circles to and from the lungs and never gets out to the body. For the infant to live, an  atrial septal defect  (ASD) or  patent foramen ovale  (passage between the left and right atria) must exist to allow oxygenated blood to flow to the left side of the heart and the rest of the body. How severe this condition is depends on whether the pulmonary veins are blocked or obstructed as they drain. Obstructed TAPVR causes symptoms early in life and can be deadly very quickly if it is not found and corrected with surgery. Symptoms 
 
 The infant may appear very sick and may have the following symptoms: Bluish color of the skin (cyanosis) Frequent respiratory infections Lethargy Poor feeding Poor growth Rapid breathing  Note: Sometimes, no symptoms may be present in infancy or early childhood. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: Cardiac catheterization  can confirm the diagnosis by showing that the blood vessels are abnormally attached ECG  shows enlargement of the ventricles (ventricular hypertrophy) Echocardiogram  may show that the pulmonary vessels are attached MRI of the heart can show the connections between the pulmonary vessels X-ray of the chest  shows a normal to small heart with fluid in the lungs  Treatment 
 
 Surgery to repair the problem is needed as soon as possible. In surgery, the pulmonary veins are connected to the left atrium and the defect between the right and left atrium is closed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If this condition is not treated, the heart will get larger, leading to heart failure. Repairing the defect early provides excellent results if there is no blockage of the pulmonary veins at the new connection into the heart. Infants who have obstructed veins have worsened survival. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Breathing difficulties Heart failure Irregular, fast heart rhythms (arrhythmias) Lung infections Pulmonary hypertension  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition may be apparent at the time of birth. However, symptoms may not be present until later. Call your health care provider if you notice symptoms of TAPVR. Prompt attention is required. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent TAPVR. Alternative Names 
 
 TAPVR; Total veins; Congenital heart defect - TAPVR; Cyanotic heart disease - TAPVR Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Totally anomalous pulmonary venous return, x-ray 
 Totally anomalous pulmonary venous return, x-ray 
 Totally anomalous pulmonary venous return, x-ray 
 References 
 
 Fraser CD, Carberry KE. Congenital heart disease. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, Redington AN. Congenital heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Atrial septal defect (ASD) 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Congenital heart disease 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Patent foramen ovale 
 
 Review Date 10/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Larry A. Weinrauch, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Cardiovascular Disease and Clinical Outcomes Research, Watertown, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia