
 Tracheal rupture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A tracheal or bronchial rupture is a tear or break in the windpipe (trachea) or bronchial tubes, the major airways leading to the lungs. A tear can also occur in the tissue lining the windpipe. Causes 
 
 The injury may be caused by: Infections Sores (ulcerations) due to foreign objects Trauma, such as a gunshot wound or automobile accident Injuries to the trachea or bronchi also may occur during medical procedures (for example,  bronchoscopy  and placement of a breathing tube). However, this is very uncommon. Symptoms 
 
 People with trauma who develop a tracheal or bronchial rupture often have other injuries.  Symptoms may include: Coughing up blood Bubbles of air that can be felt underneath the skin of the chest, neck, arms, and trunk ( subcutaneous emphysema )
    
Difficulty breathing
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Close attention will be paid to the symptoms of the rupture. Tests that may be done include: Neck CT scan Chest x-ray Bronchoscopy Treatment 
 
 People who have had a trauma will need to have their injuries treated. Injuries to the trachea often need to be repaired during surgery. Injuries to the smaller bronchi can sometimes be treated without surgery. A  collapsed lung  is treated with a chest tube connected to suction, which re-expands the lung. For people who have breathed a foreign body into the airways, bronchoscopy may be used to take out the object. Antibiotics are used in people with an infection in the part of the lung around the injury. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook of injury due to trauma depends on the severity of other injuries. Operations to repair these injuries often have good results. Outlook is good for people whose tracheal or bronchial disruption is due to causes such as a foreign object, which tend to have a good outcome. In the months or years after the injury, scarring at the injury site may cause problems, such as narrowing, which require other tests or procedures. Possible Complications 
 
 Major complications after surgery for this condition include: Infection Long-term need of a ventilator Narrowing of the airways Scarring When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have:  Had a major injury to the chest Inhaled a foreign body Symptoms of a chest infection The feeling of air bubbles underneath your skin and trouble breathing Alternative Names 
 
 Torn tracheal mucosa; Bronchial rupture Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 References 
 
 Asensio JA, Trunkey DD. Neck injuries. In: Asensio JA, Trunkey DD, eds.  Current Therapy of Trauma and Surgical Critical Care . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:179-185. Martin RS, Meredith JW. Management of acute trauma. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 16. 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bronchial Disorders 
 Tracheal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia