
 Trachoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Trachoma is an infection of the eye caused by bacteria called chlamydia. Causes 
 
 Trachoma is caused by infection with the bacteria  Chlamydia trachomatis .  The condition occurs around the world. It is most often seen in rural areas of developing countries. Children are often affected. However, the scarring caused by the infection may not be noticed until later in life. The condition is rare in the United States. However, it is more likely to occur in crowded or unclean living conditions.  Trachoma is spread through direct contact with infected eye, nose, or throat fluids. It can also be passed by contact with contaminated objects, such as towels or clothes. Certain flies can also spread the bacteria. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms begin 5 to 12 days after being exposed to the bacteria. The condition begins slowly. It first appears as inflammation of the tissue lining the eyelids ( conjunctivitis , or "pink eye"). Untreated, this may lead to scarring. Symptoms may include: Cloudy cornea Discharge from the eye Swelling of lymph nodes just in front of the ears Swollen eyelids Turned-in eyelashes  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do an eye exam to look for scarring on the inside of the upper eye lid, redness of the white part of the eyes, and new blood vessel growth into the cornea. Lab tests are needed to identify the bacteria and make an accurate diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics can prevent long-term complications if used early in the infection. In certain cases, eyelid surgery may be needed to prevent long-term scarring, which can lead to blindness if not corrected. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcomes are very good if treatment is started early before scarring and changes to the eyelids develop. Possible Complications 
 
 If the eyelids become very irritated, the eyelashes may turn in and rub against the cornea. This can cause corneal ulcers, additional scars, vision loss, and possibly, blindness. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child recently visited an area where trachoma is common and you notice symptoms of conjunctivitis. Prevention 
 
 Spread of the infection can be limited by washing your hands and face often, keeping clothes clean, and not sharing items such as towels. Alternative Names 
 
 Granular conjunctivitis; Egyptian ophthalmia; Conjunctivitis - granular; Conjunctivitis - chlamydia Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Chidambaram JD, Chandler RD, Lietman TM. Pathogenesis and control of blinding trachoma. In: Duane TD, Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 5, chap 60. Hammerschlag MR. Chlamydia trachomatis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 226. Rubenstein JB, Tannan A. Conjunctivitis: infectious and noninfectious. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.6. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia