
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is a procedure to create new connections between two blood vessels in your liver. You may need this procedure if you have severe liver problems. Description 
 
 This is not a surgical procedure. It is done by a radiologist using  x-ray . A radiologist is a doctor who uses imaging techniques to diagnose and treat diseases. You will be asked to lie on your back. You will be connected to monitors that will check your heart rate and blood pressure. You will probably receive local anesthesia and medicine to relax you. This will make you pain-free and sleepy. Or, you may have  general anesthesia  (asleep and pain-free). During the procedure: The doctor inserts a catheter (a flexible tube) through your skin into a vein in your neck. This vein is called the jugular vein. On the end of the catheter is a tiny balloon and a metal mesh stent (tube). Using an x-ray machine, the doctor guides the catheter into a vein in your liver. Dye (contract material) is then injected into the vein so that it can be seen more clearly. The balloon is inflated to place the stent. You may feel a little pain when this happens. The doctor uses the stent to connect your portal vein to one of your hepatic veins. At the end of the procedure, your portal vein pressure is measured to make sure it has gone down. The catheter with the balloon is then removed. After the procedure, a small bandage is placed over the neck area. There are usually no stitches. The procedure takes about 60 to 90 minutes to complete.  This new pathway will allow blood to flow better. It will ease pressure on the veins of your stomach, esophagus, intestines, and liver. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Normally, blood coming from your esophagus, stomach, and intestines first flows through the liver. When your liver has a lot of damage and there are blockages, blood cannot flow through it very easily. This is called portal hypertension (increased pressure and backup of the portal vein). The veins can then break open (rupture), causing serious bleeding. Common causes of portal hypertension are: Alcohol use Blood clots in a vein that flows from the liver to the heart Too much iron in the liver ( hemochromatosis ) Hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C When portal hypertension occurs, you may have: Bleeding from veins of the stomach, esophagus, or intestines ( variceal bleeding ) Buildup of fluid in the belly ( ascites ) Buildup of fluid in the chest (hydrothorax)  This procedure allows blood to flow better in your liver, stomach, esophagus, and intestines, and then back to your heart. Risks 
 
 Possible risks with this procedure are: Damage to blood vessels Fever Hepatic encephalopathy  (a disorder that affects concentration, mental function, and memory, and may lead to coma) Infection, bruising, or  bleeding Reactions to medicines or the dye Stiffness, bruising, or soreness in the neck  Rare risks are: Bleeding in the belly Blockage in the stent Cutting of blood vessels in the liver Heart problems or abnormal heart rhythms Infection of the stent  Before the Procedure 
 
 Your doctor may ask you to have these tests: Blood tests ( complete blood count ,  electrolytes , and kidney tests) Chest x-ray  or  EKG Tell your heath care provider: If you are or could be pregnant Any medicines you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription (your doctor may ask you to stop taking blood thinners like aspirin, heparin, or warfarin a few days before the procedure)  On the day of your procedure: DO NOT eat or drink anything after midnight the night before the procedure. Ask your doctor which medicines you should still take on the day of the procedure. Take these drugs with a small sip of water. Take a shower the night before or the morning of the procedure. Arrive on time at the hospital. You should plan to stay overnight at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 After the procedure, you will recover in your hospital room. You will be monitored for bleeding. You will have to keep your head raised. There is usually no pain after the procedure. You will be able to go home when you feel better. This may be the day after the procedure. Many people get back to their everyday activities in 7 to 10 days. Your doctor will probably do an ultrasound after the procedure to make sure the stent is working correctly. You will be asked to have a repeat ultrasound in a few weeks to make sure that the TIPS procedure is working. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Your radiologist can tell you right away how well the procedure worked. Most people recover well. TIPS works in about 80 to 90% of portal hypertension cases. The procedure is much safer than surgery and does not involve any cutting or stitches. Alternative Names 
 
 TIPS References 
 
 Azene EM, Hong K. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 2014.  Brooks MD, Li C. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. In: Mauro MA, Murphy KPJ, Thomson KR, Venbrux AC, Morgan RA, eds.  Image-Guided Interventions . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 112. Read More 
 
 Alcoholic liver disease 
 Ascites 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari) 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Portacaval shunting 
 Stent 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Review Date 2/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia