
 Transient tic disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Transient tic disorder is a condition in which a person makes 1 or many brief, repeated, movements or noises (tics). These movements or noises are involuntary (not on purpose). Causes 
 
 Transient tic disorder is common in children. The cause of transient tic disorder can be physical or mental (psychological). It may be a mild form of  Tourette syndrome . Symptoms 
 
 The child may have  facial tics  or tics involving movement of the arms, legs, or other areas. Tics may involve: Movements that occur again and again and do not have a rhythm An overwhelming urge to make the movement Brief and jerky movements that include blinking, clenching the fists, jerking the arms, kicking, raising the eyebrows, sticking out the tongue. The tics often look like nervous behavior. Tics appear to get worse with stress. They do not occur during sleep. Sounds may also occur, such as: Clicking Grunting Hissing 
  Moaning
    
   Sniffing
    
   Snorting
    
   Squealing
    
   Throat clearing
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will consider physical causes of transient tic disorder before making a diagnosis. In order to be diagnosed with transient tic disorder, the child must have had tics almost every day for at least 4 weeks, but less than a year. Other disorders such as  anxiety , attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ), uncontrollable movement ( myoclonus ),  obsessive-compulsive disorder , and  epilepsy  may need to be ruled out. Treatment 
 
 Doctors recommend that family members do not call attention to the tics at first. This is because unwanted attention may make the tics worse. If the tics are severe enough to cause problems at school or work, behavioral techniques and medicines may help. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Simple childhood tics usually disappear over a period of months. Possible Complications 
 
 There are usually no complications. A  chronic motor tic disorder  can develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Talk to your child's provider if you are concerned about a transient tic disorder, especially if it continues or disrupts your child's life. If you are not sure whether the movements are a tic or a  seizure , call the provider right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Tic - transient tic disorder Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Ryan CA, Trieu ML, DeMaso DR, Walter HR. Motor disorders and habits. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 139. Singer HS. Tics and Tourette's syndrome. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Ferriero D, eds.  Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Chronic motor tic disorder 
 Facial tics 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Tourette Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia