
 Transplant services 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Transplantation is a procedure that is done to replace one of your organs with a healthy one from someone else. The surgery is only one part of a complex, long-term process. Several experts will help you prepare for the procedure, and make sure you are comfortable before, during, and after surgery. Information 
 
 Transplant surgery is typically done to replace a diseased body part with a healthy one. SOLID ORGAN TRANSPLANTS Auto islet cell transplant is done after a person has their pancreas removed due to chronic pancreatitis. The procedure takes insulin-producing cells from the pancreas and returns them to the patient's body. Corneal transplant  replaces a damaged or diseased cornea. The cornea is the clear tissue on the front of the eye that helps focus light on the retina. It is the part of the eye on which a contact lens rests. Heart transplant  is an option for someone with congestive heart failure that has not responded to medical treatment. Intestinal transplant is an option for patients with short bowel or short gut syndrome or advanced liver disease, or who must  receive all nutrients through a feeding line . Kidney transplant  is an option for someone with chronic kidney failure. It may be done with a kidney- pancreas transplant . Liver transplant  may be the only option for someone with liver disease that has led to liver failure. Lung transplant  may replace one or both lungs. It may be the only option for someone with lung disease who has not gotten better using other medicines and therapies, and is expected to survive for less than 2 years.  BLOOD/BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTS (STEM CELL TRANSPLANTS) You may need a stem cell transplant if you have a disease that damages the cells in bone marrow, or if you received high doses of chemotherapy or radiation. Depending on the type of transplant, your procedure may be called a  bone marrow transplant , a cord blood transplant, or a peripheral blood stem cell transplant. All three use stem cells, which are immature cells that give rise to all blood cells. Stem cell transplants are similar to blood transfusions and generally do not need surgery. There are two different types of transplants: Autologous transplants use your own blood cells or bone marrow. Allogeneic transplants use a donor's blood cells or bone marrow. A syngeneic allogenic transplant uses cells or bone marrow from the patient's identical twin.  THE TRANSPLANT SERVICES TEAM The transplant services team includes carefully selected experts, including: Surgeons who specialize in performing organ transplants Medical doctors Radiologists and medical imaging technologists Nurses Infectious disease experts Physical therapists Psychiatrists, psychologists, and other counselors Social workers Nutritionists and dietitians  BEFORE AN ORGAN TRANSPLANT You will have a complete medical exam to identify and treat all medical problems, such as kidney and heart disease. The transplant team will evaluate you and review your medical history to determine if you meet the criteria for organ transplantation. Most types of organ transplants have guidelines detailing what type of patient is most likely to benefit from a transplant and will be able to manage the challenging process. If the transplant team believes you are a good candidate for a transplant, you will be put on a national waiting list. Your place on a waiting list is based on a number of factors, which depend on the type of transplant you are receiving.  Once you are on the waiting list, the search for a matching donor begins. Types of donors depend on your specific transplant, but include: A living related donor is related to you, such as a parent, sibling, or child. A living unrelated donor is a person, such as a friend or spouse. A deceased donor is someone who has recently died. The heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, and pancreas can be recovered from an organ donor.  After donating an organ, living donors can live a normal, healthy life.  You should identify family, friends, or other caregivers who can offer help and support during and after the transplant process. You will also want to prepare your home to make it comfortable for when you return after being released from the hospital. AFTER A TRANSPLANT How long you stay in the hospital depends on the type of transplant that you have. During your time in the hospital, you will be seen daily by the transplant services team. Your transplant services coordinators will arrange for your discharge. They will discuss with you plans for care at home, transportation to clinic visits, and housing, if needed. You will be told how to take care of yourself after the transplant. This will include information about: Medications How often you need to visit the doctor or clinic What daily activities are allowed or off-limits  After leaving the hospital, you will return home. You will have periodic follow-ups with the transplant team, as well as with your primary care doctor and any other specialists that may be recommended. The transplant services team will be available to answer any questions that you may have. References 
 
 Herman M, Keaveny AP. Organ transplantation. In: Walsh D, Caraceni AT, Fainsinger R, et al, eds.  Palliative Medicine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 183. Mathur M, Ginat DT, Ruben D, Scoutt LM. Evaluation of organ transplants. In: Pellerito JS, Polak JF, eds.  Introduction to Vascular Ultrasonography.  6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 34. 
 Review Date 2/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Organ Transplantation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia