
 Transvaginal ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Transvaginal ultrasound is a test used to look at a woman's uterus, ovaries, tubes,  cervix  and pelvic area. Transvaginal means across or through the vagina. The ultrasound probe will be placed inside the vagina. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will lie down on a table with your knees bent. Your feet may be held in stirrups.  You will be given a probe, called a transducer, to place into the vagina. The probe is covered with a condom and a gel.  The probe sends out sound waves, which reflect off body structures. A computer receives these waves and uses them to create a picture.  The ultrasound technician or doctor can see the picture on a TV monitor. The health care provider will move the probe around the area to see the pelvic organs.  In some cases, a special transvaginal ultrasound method called saline infusion sonography (SIS) may be needed to more clearly view the uterus. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will be asked to undress, usually from the waist down. A transvaginal ultrasound is done with your bladder empty or partly filled. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test is most often painless, although some women may have mild discomfort from the pressure of the probe. Only a small part of the probe is placed into the vagina. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Transvaginal ultrasound may be done for the following problems: Abnormal findings on a physical exam, such as cysts,  fibroid  tumors, or other growths Abnormal vaginal bleeding and menstrual problems Certain types of  infertility Ectopic pregnancy Pelvic pain Transvaginal ultrasound is also used during pregnancy .   Normal Results 
 
 The pelvic structures or fetus is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result may be due to many conditions. Some problems that may be seen include: Birth defects Cancers of the uterus, ovaries, vagina, and other pelvic structures Infection, including pelvic inflammatory disease Growths in or around the uterus and ovaries (such as cysts or fibroids) Twisting of the ovaries Risks 
 
 There are no known harmful effects of transvaginal ultrasound on humans. Unlike traditional x-rays, there is no radiation exposure with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Endovaginal ultrasound; Ultrasound - transvaginal; Fibroids - transvaginal ultrasound; Vaginal bleeding - transvaginal ultrasound; Uterine bleeding - transvaginal ultrasound; Menstrual bleeding - transvaginal ultrasound; Infertility - transvaginal ultrasound; Ovarian - transvaginal ultrasound; Abscess - transvaginal ultrasound Images 
 
 
 Ultrasound in pregnancy 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Uterus 
 Transvaginal ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Coleman RL, Ramirez PT, Gershenson DM. Neoplastic diseases of the ovary: Screening, benign and malignant epithelial and germ cell neoplasms, sex-cord stromal tumors. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 33. Katz VL. Benign gynecologic lesions: vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, oviduct, ovary, ultrasound imaging of pelvic structures. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Ultrasound pregnancy 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Ovarian Cysts 
 Pelvic Pain 
 Ultrasound 
 Uterine Fibroids 
 Vaginal Bleeding 
 Browse the Encyclopedia