
 Transillumination 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Transillumination is the shining of a light through a body area or organ to check for abnormalities. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The room lights are dimmed or turned off so that the area of the body may be seen more easily. A bright light is then pointed at that area. Areas where this test is used include the:  Head  Scrotum Chest of a premature or newborn infant Breast of an adult female Transillumination is also sometimes used to find blood vessels. In some locations in the stomach and intestine, the light can be seen through the skin and tissues at the time of  upper endoscopy  and  colonoscopy . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No preparation is necessary for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort with this test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done along with other tests to diagnose: Hydrocephalus  in newborns or infants Hydrocele  in males Breast lesions or cysts in females  In newborns, a bright halogen light may be used to transilluminate the chest cavity if there are signs of a collapsed lung or air around the heart. (Transillumination through the chest is only possible on small newborns.) In general, transillumination is not an accurate enough test to rely on. Further tests, such as an x-ray, CT, or ultrasound, are needed to confirm the diagnosis. Normal Results 
 
 Normal findings depend on the area being evaluated and the normal tissue of that area. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Areas filled with abnormal air or fluid light up when they should not. For example, in a darkened room, the head of a newborn with possible hydrocephalus will light up when this procedure is done. When done on the breast: Internal areas will be dark to black if there is a lesion and bleeding has occurred (because blood does not transilluminate). Benign  tumors tend to appear red. Malignant tumors are brown to black.  Risks 
 
 There are no risks associated with this test. Images 
 
 
 Infant brain test 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Hydrocele. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:647. Katz VL, Dotters D. Breast diseases: diagnosis and treatment of benign and malignant disease. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 15. Lissauer T. Physical examination of the newborn. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine Diseases of the Fetus and Infant . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 29. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Chest x-ray 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 Cyst 
 Hydrocele 
 Hydrocephalus 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia