
 Tricuspid atresia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tricuspid atresia is a type of heart disease that is present at birth ( congenital heart disease ), in which the tricuspid heart valve is missing or abnormally developed. The defect blocks blood flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. Causes 
 
 Tricuspid atresia is an uncommon form of congenital heart disease. It affects about 5 in every 100,000 live births. One in 5 people with this condition will also have other heart problems. Normally, blood flows from the body into the right atrium, then through the tricuspid valve to the right ventricle and on to the lungs. If the tricuspid valve does not open, the blood cannot flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. Because of the problem with the tricuspid valve, blood ultimately cannot enter the lungs. This is where it must go to pick up oxygen (becomes oxygenated). Instead, the blood passes through a hole between the right and left atrium. In the left atrium, it mixes with oxygenated blood returning from the lungs. This mix of oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood is then pumped out into the body. This causes oxygen level in the blood to be lower than normal. The lungs receive blood either through a hole between the right and left ventricles, or through a fetal vessel called the ductus arteriosus that connects the pulmonary artery (artery to the lungs) to the aorta (main artery to the body). The ductus arteriosus is present when a baby is born, but closes by itself shortly after birth. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Bluish color to the skin Fast breathing Fatigue Poor growth Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 This condition may be discovered during routine  prenatal ultrasound  imaging or when the baby is examined after birth. Bluish skin is present at birth. A heart murmur is often present at birth and may increase in loudness over several months. Tests may include the following: ECG Echocardiogram Chest x-ray Cardiac catheterization MRI of the heart Treatment 
 
 Once the diagnosis is made, the baby will often be admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). A medicine called prostaglandin E1 may be used to keep the ductus arteriosis open so that blood can circulate to the lungs. The condition always requires surgery. If the heart is unable to pump enough blood out to the lungs and rest of the body, the first surgery most often takes place within the first few days of life. In this procedure, an artificial shunt is inserted to keep blood flowing to the lungs. In some cases, this first surgery is not needed. Afterward, the baby goes home in most cases. The child will need to take one or more daily medicines and be closely followed by a pediatric cardiologist. This doctor will decide when the second stage of surgery should be done. The next stage of surgery is called the Glenn shunt or hemi-Fontan procedure. This procedure connects half of the veins carrying blue blood from the upper half of the body directly to the pulmonary artery. The surgery is most often done when the child is between 4 to 6 months old. During stage I and II, the child may still look blue (cyanotic). Stage III, the final step, is called the Fontan procedure. The rest of the veins carrying blue blood from the body are connected directly to the pulmonary artery leading to the lungs. The left ventricle now only has to pump to the body, not the lungs. This surgery is usually performed when the child is 18 months to 3 years old. After this final step, the baby is no longer blue. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, surgery will improve the condition.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Irregular, fast heart rhythms (arrhythmias) Chronic diarrhea (from a disease called protein-losing enteropathy) Heart failure Fluid in the abdomen (ascites) and in the lungs (pleural effusion) Blockage of the artificial shunt Strokes and other nervous system complications Sudden death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider right away if your infant has:  New changes in breathing patterns Problems eating Skin that is turning blue  Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent tricuspid atresia. Alternative Names 
 
 Tri atresia; Valve disorder - tricuspid atresia; Congenital heart - tricuspid atresia; Cyanotic heart disease - tricuspid atresia Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Tricuspid atresia 
 References 
 
 Fraser CD, Carberry KE. Congenital heart disease. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, Redington AN. Congenital heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Changes in the newborn at birth 
 Congenital heart disease 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Ventricular septal defect 
 
 Review Date 10/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Larry A. Weinrauch, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Cardiovascular Disease and Clinical Outcomes Research, Watertown, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia