
 Trisodium phosphate poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Trisodium phosphate is a strong chemical. Poisoning occurs if you swallow, breathe in, or spill large amounts of this substance on your skin. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Trisodium phosphate Where Found 
 
 These products may contain trisodium phosphate: Some automatic dishwashing soaps Some  toilet bowl cleaners Many industrial solvents and cleaners (hundreds to thousands of construction agents, flooring strippers, brick cleaners, cements, and many others)  Other products also contain trisodium phosphate. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of trisodium phosphate poisoning or exposure in different parts of the body. 
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
 Breathing difficulty (from inhaling trisodium phosphate) Coughing Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty)  
ESOPHAGUS, STOMACH AND INTESTINES
 Blood in the stool Burns of the esophagus (food pipe) and stomach Diarrhea Severe abdominal pain Vomiting, possibly bloody  
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
 Drooling Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue Vision loss  
HEART AND BLOOD
 Low blood pressure (develops rapidly) Collapse Severe change in blood acid level Shock  
SKIN
 Burns Hives Holes in the skin or tissue under the skin Skin irritation  Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make a person throw up. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, give the person water or milk right away. DO NOT give water or milk if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow (such as vomiting or decreased alertness). If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container that contains trisodium phosphate with you to the hospital, if possible. Treatment depends on how the poisoning occurred. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. Pain medicines will be given.  For swallowed poison, the person may receive: Endoscopy. Camera is placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids by IV (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  For inhaled poisons, the person may receive: Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the nose or mouth into the lungs Bronchoscopy. Camera is placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids by IV (through a vein) Medicine to treat symptoms  For skin exposure, the person may receive: Skin debridement (surgical removal of burned skin) Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days. Ointments applied to the skin  For eye exposure, the person may receive: Extensive irrigation to flush out the poison Medicines  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, eyes, lungs, esophagus, nose, and stomach are possible. The long-term outcome depends on the extent of this damage. Damage to the esophagus and stomach continues to occur for several weeks after the poison was swallowed. Death may occur as long as a month later. Keep all poisons in their original or childproof container, with labels visible, and out of the reach of children. Alternative Names 
 
 Sodium orthophosphate poisoning; Trisodium orthophosphate poisoning References 
 
 Cohen DE, de Souza A. Irritant contact dermatitis. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 15. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia