
 Trypsin and chymotrypsin in stool 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Trypsin and chymotrypsin are substances released from the pancreas during normal digestion. When the pancreas does not produce enough trypsin and chymotrypsin, smaller-than-normal amounts can be seen in a stool sample. This article discusses the test to measure trypsin and chymotrypsin in stool. How the Test is Performed 
 
 There are many ways to collect the samples. Your health care provider will tell you how to collect the stool. You can catch the stool on plastic wrap that is loosely placed over the toilet bowl and held in place by the toilet seat. Then put the sample in a clean container. One type of test kit contains a special tissue that you use to collect the sample. Then you put the sample in a clean container. To collect a sample from infants and young children: If the child wears a diaper, line the diaper with plastic wrap. Place the plastic wrap so that urine and stool do not mix. A drop of stool is placed on a thin layer of gelatin. If trypsin or chymotrypsin are present, the gelatin will clear. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will provide you with the supplies needed to collect the stool. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 These tests are simple ways of finding out whether you have a decrease in pancreas function. This is most often due to  chronic pancreatitis . These tests are most often done in young children who are thought to have  cystic fibrosis . Note: This test is used as a screening tool for cystic fibrosis but it does not diagnose cystic fibrosis. Other tests are needed to confirm a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. Normal Results 
 
 The result is normal if there is a normal amount of trypsin or chymotrypsin in the stool. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means the trypsin or chymotrypsin levels in your stool are below the normal range. This may mean that your pancreas is not working properly. Other tests may be done to confirm that there is a problem with your pancreas. Alternative Names 
 
 Stool - trypsin and chymotrypsin Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Forsmark C. Chronic pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisinger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 59. Forsmark C. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Pincus MR, Abraham NZ, Carty RP. Clinical enzymology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 20. Read More 
 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with gastrointestinal specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cystic Fibrosis 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Pancreatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia