
 Turbinate surgery 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The inside walls of the nose have 3 pairs of long thin bones covered with thin tissue. These bones are called nasal turbinates. Allergies or other nasal problems can cause the turbinates to swell and block airflow. Surgery can be done to fix blocked airways and improve your breathing. Description 
 
 There are several types of turbinate surgery:  Turbinectomy: All or part of the lower turbinate is taken out. This can be done in several different ways, but sometimes a tiny, high-speed device (microdebrider) is used to shave off the extra tissue. The surgery may be done through a lighted camera (endoscope) that is placed into the nose. You may have general anesthesia or local anesthesia with sedation, so you are asleep and pain-free during surgery. Turbinoplasty: A tool is placed in the nose to change the position of the turbinate. This is called the outfracture technique. Some of the tissue may also be shaved off. You may have general anesthesia or local anesthesia with sedation, so you are asleep and pain-free during surgery.  Radiofrequency or laser ablation: A thin probe is placed into the nose. Laser light or radioenergy goes through this tube and shrinks the turbinate tissue. The procedure can be done in the doctor's office using local anesthesia. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may recommend this procedure if: You have trouble breathing though your nose because the airways are swollen or blocked. Other treatments, such as allergy medicines, allergy shots, and nose sprays have not helped your breathing.  Risks 
 
 





 
Risks for any surgery are: Allergic reactions to medicines Breathing problems Heart problems Bleeding Infection Risks for this surgery are: Scar tissue or crusting in the nose A hole in the tissue that divides the sides of the nose (septum) Loss of feeling in the skin on the nose  Change in the sense of smell Fluid buildup in the nose Return of the nasal blockage after surgery



 Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider: If you are or could be pregnant What drugs you are taking, including medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription If you have more than 1 or 2 alcoholic drinks a day  During the days before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), clopidogrel (Plavix), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask your doctor which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery.  On the day of your surgery: You will be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before your surgery. Take the medicines your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Your provider will tell you when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 Many people have good short-term relief from radioablation. Symptoms of nasal blockage may come back, but many people still have better breathing 2 years after the procedure. Almost all people who have turbinoplasty with a microdebrider will still have improved breathing 3 years after surgery. Some do not need to use nasal medicine anymore.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You will go home on the same day as surgery.  You will have some discomfort and pain in your face for 2 or 3 days. Your nose will feel blocked until the swelling goes down.  The nurse will show you how to take care of your nose during your recovery.  You will be able to go back to work or school in 1 week. You can return to your normal activities after 3 weeks.  It may take up to 2 months to heal completely. Alternative Names 
 
 Turbinectomy; Turbinoplasty; Turbinate reduction; Nasal airway surgery  References 
 
 Chhabra N, Houser SM. The surgical management of allergic rhinitis.  Otolaryngol Clin N Am . 2011;44:779-5. PMID: 21621061  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21621061 . Joe SA, Patel S. Nonallergic rhinitis. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 46. 
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, BS, Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia