
 Tympanometry 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tympanometry is a test used to detect problems in the middle ear. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Before the test, your health care provider will look inside your ear to make sure nothing is blocking the eardrum. Next, a device is placed into your ear. This device changes the air pressure in your ear and makes the eardrum move back and forth. A machine records the results on graphs called tympanograms. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not move, speak, or swallow during the test. Such movements can change the pressure in the middle ear and give incorrect test results. The sounds heard during the test may be loud. This may be startling. You will need to try very hard to stay calm and not get startled during the test. If your child is to have this test done, it may be helpful to show how the test is done using a doll. The more your child knows what to expect and why the test is done, the less nervous your child will be. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There may be some discomfort while the probe is in the ear, but no harm will result. You will hear a loud tone and feel pressure in your ear as the measurements are taken. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test measures how your ear reacts to sound and different pressures. Normal Results 
 
 The pressure inside the middle ear can vary by a very small amount. The eardrum should look smooth. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Tympanometry may reveal any of the following: A  tumor  in the middle ear Fluid in the middle ear Impacted  ear wax Lack of contact between the conduction bones of the middle ear Perforated eardrum Scarring of the tympanic membrane  Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Tympanogram; Otitis media - tympanometry; Effusion - tympanometry Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Otoscope examination 
 References 
 
 Amundsen GA. Tympanometry. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 75. Bauer CA, Jenkins HA. Otologic symptoms and syndromes. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 156. Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media.  Pediatrics . 2013;131(3):e964-e999. PMID: 23439909.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23439909 . Read More 
 
 Ear wax 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia