
 Typhus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Typhus is a bacterial disease spread by lice or fleas. Causes 
 
 Typhus is caused by 2 types of bacteria:  Rickettsia typhi  or  Rickettsia prowazekii .  Rickettsia typhi  causes endemic or murine typhus.  Endemic typhus is uncommon in the United States. It is usually seen in areas where hygiene is poor and the temperature is cold. Endemic typhus is sometimes called "jail fever." The bacteria that causes this type is usually spread from rats to fleas to humans. Murine typhus occurs in the southern United States, particularly California and Texas. It is often seen during the summer and fall. It is rarely deadly. You are more likely to get this type of typhus if you are around rat feces or fleas, and other animals such as cats, possums, raccoons, and skunks.  Rickettsia prowazekii  causes epidemic typhus. It is spread by lice.  Brill-Zinsser disease is a mild form of epidemic typhus. It occurs when the bacteria becomes active again in a person who was previously infected. It is more common in the elderly.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of murine or endemic typhus may include: Abdominal pain Backache Dull red rash that begins on the middle of the body and spreads Fever (can be extremely high 105°F to 106°F, 40.6°C to 41.1°C) that may last up to 2 weeks Hacking, dry cough Headache Joint and muscle pain Nausea Vomiting  Symptoms of epidemic typhus may include: Chills Confusion Cough Delirium High fever Joint pain Lights that appear very bright; light may hurt the eyes Low blood pressure Rash that begins on the chest and spreads to the rest of the body (except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet) Severe headache Severe muscle pain Stupor The early rash is a light rose color and fades when you press on it. Later, the rash becomes dull and red and does not fade. People with severe typhus may also develop small areas of bleeding into the skin. Exams and Tests 
 
 A complete blood count ( CBC ) may show a low white blood cell count,  anemia , and low  platelets . Other blood tests for typhus may show: High levels of typhus  antibodies Low levels of  albumin Low  sodium  level Mildly high liver enzymes  Treatment 
 
 Treatment includes the following antibiotics: Doxycycline Tetracycline Chloramphenicol (less common)  Tetracycline taken by mouth can permanently stain teeth that are still forming. It is usually not prescribed for children until after all of their permanent teeth have grown. People with epidemic typhus may need oxygen and  intravenous  (IV) fluids. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with epidemic typhus who receive treatment quickly should completely recover. Without treatment, death can occur in up to 60% of patients with epidemic typhus. Those over age 60 have the highest risk of death.  Only a small number of untreated people with murine typhus may die. Prompt antibiotic treatment will cure nearly all people with murine typhus. Possible Complications 
 
 Typhus may cause these complications:  Renal insufficiency  (kidneys cannot function normally) Pneumonia Central nervous system  damage  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of typhus. This serious disorder can require emergency care. Prevention 
 
 Avoid being in areas where you might encounter rat fleas or  lice . Good sanitation and public health measures reduce the rat population. Measures to get rid of lice when an infection has been found include: Bathing Boiling clothes or avoiding infested clothing for at least 5 days (lice will die without feeding on blood) Using insecticides (10% DDT, 1% malathion, or 1% permethrin) Alternative Names 
 
 Murine typhus; Epidemic typhus; Endemic typhus; Brill-Zinsser disease; Jail fever References 
 
 Blanton LS, Dumler JS, Walker DH. Rickettsia typhi (Murine typhus). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 192.  Blanton LS, Walker DH. Rickettsia prowazeckii (Epidemic or louse-borne typhus). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 191. Raoult D. Rickettsial infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 335.  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Central nervous system 
 Fever 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Q fever - early 
 Rashes 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Insect Bites and Stings 
 Browse the Encyclopedia