
 Ultrasound pregnancy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pregnancy ultrasound is an imaging test that uses sound waves to create a picture of how a baby is developing in the womb. It is also used to check the female pelvic organs during pregnancy. Watch this video about: Ultrasound How the Test is Performed 
 
 To have the procedure: You will lie on your back on an exam table. The person performing the test will spread a clear, water-based gel on your belly and pelvis area. A handheld probe will then be moved the area. The gel helps the probe transmit sound waves. These waves bounce off the body structures, including the developing baby, to create a picture on the ultrasound machine.  In some cases, a pregnancy ultrasound may be done by  placing the probe into the vagina . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will need to have a full bladder to get the best ultrasound image. You may be asked to drink 2 to 3 glasses of liquid an hour before the test. DO NOT urinate before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There may be some discomfort from pressure on the full bladder. The conducting gel may feel slightly cold and wet. You will not feel the ultrasound waves. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 An ultrasound may be done to determine if there is a problem with the pregnancy, how far along the pregnancy is, or to take measurements and screen for potential problems. Talk to your health care provider to determine the most appropriate scanning schedule for you. A pregnancy ultrasound may be done during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy to: Confirm a normal pregnancy Determine the baby's age Look for problems, such as ectopic pregnancies or the chances for a miscarriage Determine the baby's heart rate Look for multiple pregnancies (such as twins and triplets) Identify problems of the placenta, uterus, cervix, and ovaries Look for findings that might indicate an increased risk for  Down syndrome A pregnancy ultrasound may also be done in the second and third trimesters to: Determine the baby's age, growth, position, and sometimes gender Identify any problems with how the fetus is developing Look for twins or triplets. Look at the placenta, amniotic fluid, and pelvis  Some centers are now performing a pregnancy ultrasound around 9 to 13 weeks of pregnancy to look for signs of Down syndrome or other problems in the developing baby. This test is often combined with blood tests to improve the accuracy of results. How many ultrasounds you will need depends on whether a previous scan or blood test has detected problems that require follow-up testing. Normal Results 
 
 The developing baby, placenta, amniotic fluid, and surrounding structures appear normal for the gestational age. Note: Normal results may vary slightly. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal ultrasound results may be due to some of the following conditions: Birth defects Ectopic pregnancy Poor growth of a baby while in the mother's womb Multiple pregnancies Miscarriage Problems with the baby's position in the womb Problems with the placenta, including placenta previa and placental abruption Too little amniotic fluid Too much amniotic fluid ( polyhydramnios ) Tumors of pregnancy, including gestational trophoblastic disease Other problems with the ovaries, uterus, and remaining pelvic structures  Risks 
 
 Current ultrasound techniques appear to be safe. Ultrasound does not involve radiation.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pregnancy sonogram; Obstetric ultrasonography; Obstetric sonogram; Ultrasound - pregnancy; IUGR - ultrasound; Intrauterine growth - ultrasound; Polyhydramnios - ultrasound; Oligohydramnios - ultrasound; Placenta previa - ultrasound; Multiple pregnancy - ultrasound; Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy - ultrasound; Fetal monitoring - ultrasound Images 
 
 
 Ultrasound in pregnancy 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - abdomen measurements 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - arm and legs 
 Ultrasound, normal placenta - Braxton Hicks 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - face 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - femur measurement 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - foot 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - head measurements 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - heartbeat 
 Ultrasound, ventricular septal defect - heartbeat 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - arms and legs 
 Ultrasound, normal relaxed placenta 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - profile view 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - spine and ribs 
 Ultrasound, color - normal umbilical cord 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus - ventricles of brain 
 Prenatal ultrasound - series 
 3D ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Richards DS. Obstetrical ultrasound: imaging, dating, and growth. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 9. Tayal VS. Emergency ultrasound. In Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 196. Wolf RB. Abdominal imaging. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ, Moore TR, Greene MF, eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 24. Read More 
 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Intrauterine growth restriction 
 Polyhydramnios 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Prenatal Testing 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia