
 Umbilical cord care in newborns 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 When your baby is born the umbilical cord is cut and there is a stump left. The stump should dry and fall off by the time your baby is 5 to 15 days old. Keep the stump clean with gauze and water only. Sponge bathe the rest of your baby, as well. DO NOT put your baby in a tub of water until the stump has fallen off. Let the stump fall off naturally. DO NOT try to pull it off, even if it is only hanging on by a thread. Watch the umbilical cord stump for infection. This does not occur often. But if it does, the infection can spread quickly. Signs of a local infection at the stump include: Foul-smelling, yellow drainage from the stump Redness, swelling, or tenderness of the skin around the stump  Be aware of signs of a more serious infection. Contact your baby's health care provider immediately if your baby has: Poor feeding Fever  of 100.4°F (38°C) or higher Lethargy Floppy , poor muscle tone  If the cord stump is pulled off too soon, it could start actively bleeding, meaning every time you wipe away a drop of blood, another drop appears. If the cord stump continues to bleed, call your baby's provider immediately. Sometimes, instead of completely drying, the cord will form pink scar tissue called a granuloma. The granuloma drains a light-yellowish fluid. This will most often go away in about a week. If it does not, call your baby's provider . If your baby's stump has not fallen off in 4 weeks (and more likely much sooner), call you baby's provider. There may be a problem with the baby's anatomy or immune system. Alternative Names 
 
 Cord - umbilical; Neonatal care - umbilical cord Images 
 
 
 Umbilical cord healing 
 Sponge bath 
 References 
 
 Carlo WA, Ambalavanan N. The umbilicus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 105. Taylor JA, Wright JA, Woodrum D. Routine newborn care. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 26. 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Care 
 Browse the Encyclopedia