
 Ureteral retrograde brush biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ureteral retrograde brush  biopsy  is a surgical procedure. During the surgery, your surgeon takes a small sample of tissue from the lining of the kidney or ureter. The ureter is the tube that connects a kidney to the bladder. The tissue is sent to a lab for testing. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure is done using: Regional ( spinal ) anesthesia General anesthesia You will not feel any pain. The test takes about 30 to 60 minutes. A  cystoscope  is first placed through the urethra into the bladder. Cystoscope is a tube with a camera on the end. Then a guide wire is inserted through the cystoscope into the ureter (the tube between the bladder and kidney). The cystoscope is removed. But the guide wire is left in place. A ureteroscope is inserted over or next to the guide wire. The ureteroscope is a longer, thinner telescope with a small camera. The surgeon can see the inside of the ureter or kidney through the camera. A nylon or steel brush is placed through the ureteroscope. The area to be biopsied is rubbed with the brush. Biopsy forceps may be used instead to collect a tissue sample. The brush or biopsy forceps is removed. The tissue is taken from the instrument. The sample is then sent to a pathology lab for analysis. The instrument and guide wire are removed from the body. A small tube or stent may be left in the ureter. This prevents a kidney blockage caused by swelling from the procedure. It is removed later. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may not be able to eat or drink anything for about 6 hours before the test. Your health care provider will tell you how you need to prepare. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have some mild cramping or discomfort after the test is over. You may have a burning feeling the first few times you empty your bladder. You may also urinate more often or have some blood in your urine for a few days after the procedure. You may have discomfort from the stent that will continue to be in place until it is removed at a later time. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to take a sample of tissue from the kidney or ureter. It is performed when an  x-ray  or other test has shown a suspicious area (lesion). This can also be done if there are abnormal cells in the urine. Normal Results 
 
 The tissue appears normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may show cancer cells ( carcinoma ). This test is often used to tell the difference between cancerous (malignant) and noncancerous ( benign ) lesions. Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots Infection Another possible risk for this procedure is a hole (perforation) in the ureter. This can cause scarring of the ureter. Tell your provider if you have an allergy to seafood. This could cause you to have an  allergic reaction  to the contrast dye used during this test.  Considerations 
 
 This test should not be performed in people with a: Urinary tract infection Blockage at or below the biopsy site  You may have  abdominal pain  or pain on your side ( flank ).  A small amount of  blood in the urine  is normal the first few times you urinate after the procedure. Your urine may look faintly pink. Report very bloody urine or bleeding that lasts longer than 3 emptyings of the bladder to your provider. Call your provider if you have: Pain that is bad or is not getting better Fever Chills Very bloody urine Bleeding that continues after you have emptied your bladder 3 times  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - brush - urinary tract; Retrograde ureteral brush biopsy cytology; Cytology - ureteral retrograde brush biopsy Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 Ureteral biopsy 
 References 
 
 National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy.  www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/diagnostic-tests/cystoscopy-ureteroscopy/Pages/default.aspx . Accessed June 14, 2016. Smith AK, Surena FM, Jarrett TW. Urothelial tumors of the upper urinary tract and ureter. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Cancer 
 Renal 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 5/23/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Ureteral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia