
 Urethritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urethritis is inflammation (swelling and irritation) of the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine from the body. Causes 
 
 Both bacteria and viruses may cause urethritis. The same bacteria that cause this condition are  E coli,   chlamydia ,  gonorrhea . These bacteria also cause  urinary tract infections  and some sexually transmitted diseases. Viral causes are  herpes simplex virus  and cytomegalovirus. Other causes include: Injury Sensitivity to the chemicals used in spermicides or contraceptive jellies, or foams  Sometimes the cause is unknown. Risks for urethritis include: Being a female Being male, ages 20 to 35 Having many sexual partners High-risk sexual behavior (such as anal sex without a condom) History of sexually transmitted diseases  Symptoms 
 
 In men: Blood in the urine or semen Burning pain while urinating ( dysuria ) Discharge from penis Fever (rare) Frequent or urgent urination Itching, tenderness, or swelling in penis Enlarged lymph nodes in the groin area Pain with intercourse or ejaculation  In women: Abdominal pain Burning pain while urinating Fever and chills Frequent or urgent urination Pelvic pain Pain with intercourse Vaginal discharge  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. In men, the exam will include the abdomen, bladder area, penis, and scrotum. The physical exam may show: Discharge from the penis Tender and enlarged lymph nodes in the groin area Tender and swollen penis  A  digital rectal exam  will also be performed. Women will have abdominal and pelvic exams. The provider will check for: Discharge from the urethra Tenderness of the lower abdomen Tenderness of the urethra  Your provider may look into your bladder using a tube with a camera on the end. This is called cystoscopy.  The following tests may be done: Complete blood count ( CBC ) C-reactive protein test Pelvic  ultrasound  (women only) Pregnancy test (women only) Urinalysis  and urine cultures Tests for  gonorrhea ,  chlamydia , and other sexually transmitted illnesses (STI) Urethral swab Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to: Get rid of the cause of infection Improve symptoms Prevent the spread of infection If you have a bacterial infection, you will be given antibiotics. You may take pain relievers, urinary pain reliever along with antibiotics. People with urethritis who are being treated should avoid sex, or use condoms during sex. Your sexual partner must also be treated if the condition is caused by an infection. Urethritis caused by trauma or chemical irritants is treated by avoiding the source of injury or irritation. Urethritis that does not clear up after antibiotic treatment and lasts for at least 6 weeks is called chronic urethritis. Different antibiotics may be used to treat this problem. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With the correct diagnosis and treatment, urethritis most often clears up without further problems.  However, urethritis can lead to long-term damage to the urethra and scar tissue called  urethral stricture . It can also cause damage to other urinary organs in both men and women. In women, the infection could lead to fertility problems if it spreads to the pelvis. Possible Complications 
 
 Men with urethritis are at risk for the following: Bladder infection ( cystitis ) Epididymitis Infection in the testicles ( orchitis ) Prostate infection (prostatitis)  After a severe infection, the urethra may become scarred and then narrowed. Women with urethritis are at risk for the following: Bladder infection (cystitis) Cervicitis Pelvic inflammatory disease  (PID -- an infection of the uterus lining, fallopian tubes, or ovaries)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of urethritis. Prevention 
 
 Things you can do to help avoid urethritis include: Keep the area around the opening of the urethra clean. Follow safer sex practices. Have one sexual partner only (monogamy) and use condoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Urethral syndrome; NGU; Non-gonococcal urethritis Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Augenbraun MH, McCormack WM. Urethritis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 109. Swygard H, Cohen MS. Approach to the patient with a sexually transmitted disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 285. Read More 
 
 Epididymitis 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Urethral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia