
 Urethral discharge culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urethral discharge culture is a laboratory test done on men and boys. This test is used to identify germs in the urethra that may be causing  urethritis . The urethra is the tube that drains urine from the bladder. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider uses sterile cotton or gauze to clean the opening of the urethra at the tip of the penis. To collect the sample, a cotton swab is then gently inserted about 3/4 inch (2 centimeters) into the urethra and turned. To get a good sample, the test should be done at least 2 hours after urinating. The sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria or any other germs grow. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do NOT urinate for 1 hour before the test. Urinating washes away some of the germs needed for accurate test results. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is usually some discomfort from swabbing the urethra. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The provider often orders the test when there is a discharge from the urethra. This test can detect sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia . Normal Results 
 
 A negative culture, or no growth appearing in the culture, is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results can be a sign of infection in the genital tract. These infections can include gonorrhea or chlamydia. Risks 
 
 Fainting may occur when the swab is introduced into the urethra. This is due to stimulation of the vagus nerve. Other risks include infection or bleeding. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture of urethral discharge; Genital exudate culture; Culture - genital discharge or exudate Images 
 
 
 Male bladder anatomy 
 References 
 
 Augenbraun MH, McCormack WM. Urethritis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 109. Craft AC, Woods GL. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 63. Read More 
 
 Chlamydia 
 Chlamydial infections - male 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chlamydia Infections 
 Gonorrhea 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Urethral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia