
 Ureterocele 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A ureterocele is a swelling at the bottom of one of the ureters. Ureters are the tubes that carry urine from the kidney to the bladder. The swollen area can block urine flow. A ureterocele is a birth defect. Causes 
 
 A ureterocele occurs in the lower part of the ureter. It is the part where the tube enters the bladder. The swollen area prevents urine from moving freely into the bladder. The urine collects in the ureter and stretches its walls. It expands like a water balloon. A ureterocele can also cause urine to flow backward from the bladder to the kidney. This is called reflux. Ureteroceles occur in about 1 in 500 people. This condition is equally common in both the left and right ureters. Symptoms 
 
 Most people with ureteroceles do not have any symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they may include: Abdominal pain Back pain that may be only on one side Severe side (flank) pain and spasms that may reach to the groin, genitals, and thigh Blood in the urine Burning pain while urinating ( dysuria ) Fever Some other symptoms are: Foul-smelling urine Frequent and urgent urination Lump (mass) in the abdomen that can be felt Ureterocele tissue falls down (prolapse) through the female urethra and into the vagina Urinary incontinence Exams and Tests 
 
 Large ureteroceles are often diagnosed earlier than smaller ones. It may be discovered in a  pregnancy ultrasound  before the baby is born.  Some people with ureteroceles do not know they have the condition. Often, the problem is found later in life due to  kidney stones  or infection. A  urinalysis  may reveal blood in the urine or signs of urinary tract infection. The following tests may be done: Abdominal ultrasound CT scan of the abdomen Cystoscopy  (examination of the inside of the bladder) Pyelogram Radionuclide renal scan Voiding cystourethrogram Blood pressure may be high if there is kidney damage. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are often given to prevent further infections until surgery can be done. The goal of treatment is to eliminate of the blockage. Drains placed in the ureter or  renal  area ( stents ) may provide short-term relief of symptoms. Surgery to repair the ureterocele cures the condition in most cases. Your surgeon may cut into the ureterocele. Another surgery may involve removing the ureterocele and reattaching the ureter to the bladder. The type of surgery depends on your age, overall health, and extent of the blockage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies. The damage may be temporary if the blockage can be cured. However, damage to the kidney may be permanent if the condition doesn't go away.  Kidney failure is uncommon. The other kidney will most often work normally. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Long-term bladder damage (incontinence/urinary retention) Long-term  kidney damage , including loss of function in one kidney Urinary tract infection that keeps coming back When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of ureterocele. Alternative Names 
 
 Incontinence - ureterocele Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Ureterocele 
 References 
 
 Guay-Woodford LM. Hereditary nephropathies and developmental abnormalities of the urinary tract. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 128. Peters CA, Mendelsohn C. Ectopic ureter, ureterocele, and ureteral anomalies. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 134. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Obstructive uropathy 
 Ultrasound 
 Ultrasound pregnancy 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Urinary tract infection - children 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ureteral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia