
 Uric acid  - blood  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uric acid is a chemical created when the body breaks down substances called purines. Purines are found in some foods and drinks. These include liver, anchovies, mackerel, dried beans and peas, and beer. Most uric acid dissolves in blood and travels to the kidneys. From there, it passes out in urine. If your body produces too much uric acid or does not remove enough if it, you can get sick. A high level of uric acid in the blood is called hyperuricemia. This test checks to see how much uric acid you have in your blood. Another test can be used to check the level of  uric acid in your urine . How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink anything for 4 hours before the test unless told otherwise.  Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  Your provider may also tell you to stop taking any drugs that may affect the test results. Never stop taking any medicine without talking to your provider. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to see if you have high levels of uric acid in your blood. High levels of uric acid can sometimes cause  gout  or kidney disease. You may have this test if you have had or are about to have certain types of chemotherapy. Rapid weight loss, which may occur with such treatments, can increase the amount of uric acid in your blood. Normal Results 
 
 Normal values range between 3.5 and 7.2 mg/dL. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The example above shows the common measurement range for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Greater-than-normal levels of uric acid (hyperuricemia) may be due to: Acidosis Alcoholism Chemotherapy-related side effects Diabetes Excessive exercise Gout Hypoparathyroidism Lead poisoning Leukemia Medullary cystic kidney disease Nephrolithiasis Polycythemia vera Purine-rich diet Renal failure Toxemia of pregnancy Lower-than-normal levels of uric acid may be due to: Fanconi syndrome Low purine diet Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion Wilson disease Other reasons this test may be performed include: Chronic gouty arthritis Chronic kidney disease Injury of the kidney and ureter Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Uric acid crystals 
 References 
 
 Edwards NL. Crystal deposition diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 273. Read More 
 
 Acidosis 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Diabetes 
 Gout 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Kidney stones 
 Lead poisoning 
 Low sodium level 
 Metabolism 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Preeclampsia 
 Wilson disease 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gout 
 Kidney Stones 
 Kidney Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia