
 Urination - excessive amount 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Excessive amount of urination means that your body makes larger than normal amounts of urine each day.  Causes 
 
 An excessive volume of urination for an adult is more than 2.5 liters of urine per day. However, this can vary depending on how much water you drink and what your total body water is. This problem is different from needing to urinate often. Polyuria is a fairly common symptom. People often notice the problem when they have to get up during the night to use the bathroom (nocturia). Some common causes of the problems are: Diabetes insipidus Diabetes mellitus Drinking excessive amounts of water Less common causes include:  Kidney failure Medicines such as diuretics and lithium High or low calcium level in the body Drinking alcohol and caffeine Sickle cell anemia Also, your urine production may increase for 24 hours after having tests that involve injecting a special dye (contrast medium) into your vein during imaging tests such as a CT scan or an MRI scan. Home Care 
 
 To monitor your urine output, keep a daily record of the following: How much you drink How often you urinate and how much urine you produce each time How much you weigh (use the same scale every day) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have excessive urination over several days, and it is not explained by medicines you take or drinking more fluids. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions such as:  When did the problem start and has it changed over time? How often do you urinate? Do you get up at night to urinate? Do you have problems controlling your urine? What makes the problem worse? Better? Have you noticed any blood in your urine or change in urine color? Do you have any other symptoms (such as pain, burning, fever, or abdominal pain)? Do you have a history of diabetes, kidney disease, or  urinary infections ? What medicines do you take?  How much salt do you eat? Do you drink alcohol and caffeine? Tests that may be done include: Blood sugar (glucose) test Blood urea nitrogen  test Creatinine  (serum) Electrolytes  (serum) Fluid deprivation test (limiting fluids to see if the urine volume decreases) Osmolality  blood test Urinalysis Urine osmolality  test  Alternative Names 
 
 Polyuria Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and the urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. Venkataraman R, Kellum JA. Polyuria. In: Vincent JL, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 10. 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia