
 Urinary incontinence - retropubic suspension 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Retropubic suspension is surgery to help control  stress incontinence . This is urine leakage that happens when you laugh, cough, sneeze, lift things, or exercise. The surgery helps close your urethra and bladder neck. The urethra is the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the outside. The bladder neck is the part of the bladder that connects to the urethra. Description 
 
 You receive either  general anesthesia  or spinal anesthesia before the surgery starts. With general anesthesia, you are asleep and feel no pain. With spinal anesthesia, you are awake but numb from the waist down and feel no pain.  A catheter (tube) is placed in your bladder to drain urine from your bladder. There are two ways to do retropubic suspension: open surgery or laparoscopic surgery. Either way, surgery may take up to 2 hours. During open surgery: A surgical cut (incision) is made on the lower part of your belly. Through this cut the bladder is located. The doctor sews (sutures) the bladder neck, part of the wall of the vagina, and the urethra to the bones and ligaments in your pelvis. This lifts the bladder and urethra so they can close better.  During laparoscopic surgery, the doctor makes a smaller cut in your belly. A tube-like device that allows the doctor to see your organs (laparoscope) is put into your belly through this cut. The doctor sutures the bladder neck, part of the wall of the vagina, and the urethra to the bones and ligaments in the pelvis. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This procedure is done to treat  stress incontinence . Before discussing surgery, your doctor will have you try bladder retraining, Kegel exercises, medicines, or other options. If you tried these and are still having problems with urine leakage, surgery may be your best option. Risks 
 
 Risks of any surgery are: Bleeding Blood clots  in the legs that may travel to the lungs Breathing problems Infection in the surgical cut, or opening of the cut Other infection  Risks of this surgery are: Abnormal passage ( fistula ) between the vagina and the skin Damage to the urethra, bladder, or vagina Irritable bladder, causing the need to urinate more often More difficulty emptying your bladder, or the need to use a catheter Worsening of urine leakage  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your health care provider what medicines you are taking. These include medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. During the days before the surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Your provider can help.  On the day of your surgery: You will likely be asked not to drink or eat anything for 6 to 12 hours before the surgery. Take the medicines you have been told to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital. Be sure to arrive on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will likely have a  catheter  in your urethra or in your abdomen above your pubic bone (suprapubic catheter). The catheter is used to drain urine from the bladder. You may go home with the catheter still in place. Or you may need to perform intermittent catheterization. This is a procedure in which you use a catheter only when you need to urinate. You will be taught how to do this before you leave the hospital. You may have gauze packing in the vagina after surgery to help stop bleeding. It is usually removed a few hours after surgery. You may leave the hospital on the same day as surgery. Or you may stay for 2 or 3 days after this surgery. Follow instructions about how to care for yourself after you go home. Keep all follow-up appointments. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Urinary leakage decreases for most women who have this surgery. But you may still have some leakage. This may be because other problems are causing your urinary incontinence. Over time, some or all of the leakage may come back. Alternative Names 
 
 Open retropubic colposuspension; Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz (MMK) procedure; Laparoscopic retropubic colposuspension; Needle suspension; Burch colposuspension References 
 
 Appell RA, Dmochowski RR, Blaivas JM, Gormley EA, et al. Female Stress Urinary Incontinence Update Panel of the American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc, Whetter LE. Update of AUA guideline on the surgical management of female stress urinary incontinence.  J Urol . 2010;183:1906-14. PMID: 20303102  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20303102 .  Chapple CR. Retropubic suspension surgery for incontinence in women. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, et al., eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 71. Wai CY. Surgical treatment for stress and urge urinary incontinence.  Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am . 2009;36:509-19. PMID: 19932413  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19932413 .  Read More 
 
 Anterior vaginal wall repair 
 Inflatable artificial sphincter 
 Stress urinary incontinence 
 Urge incontinence 
 Urinary incontinence 
 Urinary incontinence - injectable implant 
 Urinary incontinence - tension-free vaginal tape 
 Urinary incontinence - vaginal sling procedures 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Kegel exercises - self-care 
 Self catheterization - female 
 Suprapubic catheter care 
 Urinary catheters - what to ask your doctor 
 Urinary incontinence products - self-care 
 Urinary incontinence surgery - female - discharge  
 Urinary incontinence - what to ask your doctor 
 Urine drainage bags 
 When you have urinary incontinence 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, Urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinary Incontinence 
 Browse the Encyclopedia