
 Urine odor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urine odor refers to the smell from your urine. Urine odor varies. Most of the time, urine does not have a strong smell if you are healthy and drink plenty of fluids. Causes 
 
 Most changes in urine odor are not a sign of disease and go away in time. Some foods and medicines, including vitamins, may affect your urine's odor. For example, eating asparagus causes a distinct urine odor.  Foul-smelling urine may be due to bacteria. Sweet-smelling urine may be a sign of uncontrolled diabetes or a rare disease of metabolism. Liver disease and certain metabolic disorders may cause musty-smelling urine. Some conditions that can cause changes in urine odor include: Bladder  fistula Bladder infection Body is low on fluids (concentrated urine can smell like ammonia)  Poorly controlled diabetes (sweet smelling urine) Liver failure Ketonuria When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have signs of a urinary tract infection with abnormal urine odor. These include: Fever Chills  Burning pain with urination  Back pain  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 You may have the following tests: Urinalysis Urine culture References 
 
 Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016: chap 114. Israni AK, Kasiske BL. Laboratory assessment of kidney disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 25. 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Urinalysis 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia