
 
 
 
 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
    			A urinary tract infection, or UTI, is an infection of the urinary tract. The infection can occur at different points in the urinary tract, including: 
 
 Bladder. An infection in the bladder is also called  cystitis  or a bladder infection. 
 Kidneys. An infection of one or both kidneys is called  pyelonephritis  or a kidney infection. 
 Ureters. The tubes that take urine from each kidney to the bladder are rarely the only site of infection. 
 Urethra. An infection of the tube that empties urine from the bladder to the outside is called  urethritis . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most UTIs are caused by bacteria that enter the urethra and then the bladder. The infection most commonly develops in the bladder, but can spread to the kidneys. Most of the time, your body can get rid of these bacteria. However, certain conditions increase the risk of having UTIs. Women tend to get them more often because their urethra is shorter and closer to the anus than in men. Because of this, women are more likely to get an infection after sexual activity or when using a diaphragm for birth control. Menopause also increases the risk of a UTI. The following also increase your chances of developing a UTI: 
 
 Diabetes 
 Advanced age and conditions that affect personal care habits (such as  Alzheimer disease  and  delirium ) 
 Problems emptying the bladder completely 
 Having a urinary catheter 
 Bowel incontinence 
 Enlarged prostate ,  narrowed urethra , or anything that blocks the flow of urine 
 Kidney stones 
 Staying still (immobile) for a long period of time (for example, while you are recovering from a hip fracture) 
 Pregnancy 
 Surgery or other procedure involving the urinary tract 
 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The symptoms of a bladder infection include: 
 
 Cloudy  or bloody urine, which may have a foul or strong odor 
 Low fever in some people 
 Pain or burning with urination 
 Pressure or cramping in the lower abdomen or back 
 Strong need to urinate often, even right after the bladder has been emptied 
 
 If the infection spreads to your kidneys, symptoms may include: 
 
 Chills and shaking or night sweats 
 Fatigue and a general ill feeling 
 Fever above 101°F (38.3°C) 
 Pain in the side, back, or groin 
 Flushed, warm, or reddened skin 
 Mental changes or  confusion  (in older people, these symptoms often are the only signs of a UTI) 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Very bad abdominal pain (sometimes) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most of the time you will need to provide a urine sample for the following tests: 
 
 Urinalysis . This test is done to look for white blood cells, red blood cells, bacteria, and to test chemicals such as nitrites in the urine. This test can diagnose an infection most of the time. 
 Clean-catch urine culture . This test may be done to identify the bacteria and determine the best antibiotic for treatment. 
 
 Blood tests such as complete blood count ( CBC ) and a  blood culture  may be done as well. You may also need the following tests to help rule out other problems in your urinary system: 
 
 CT scan of the abdomen 
 Intravenous pyelogram  (IVP) 
 Kidney scan 
 Kidney ultrasound 
 Voiding cystourethrogram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your health care provider must first decide if the infection is just in the bladder, or if it has spread to the kidneys and how severe it is. MILD BLADDER AND KIDNEY INFECTIONS 
 
 Most of the time you will need to take an antibiotic to prevent the infection from spreading to the kidneys. 
 For a simple bladder infection, you will take antibiotics for 3 days (women) or 7 to 14 days (men). 
 If you are pregnant or have diabetes, or have a mild kidney infection, you will most often take antibiotics for 7 to 14 days. 
 Finish all of the antibiotics, even if you feel better. If you do not finish the whole dose of medicine, the infection may return and be harder to treat later. 
 Always drink plenty of water when you have a bladder or kidney infection. 
 Tell your provider if you might be pregnant before taking these drugs. 
 
 RECURRENT BLADDER INFECTIONS Some women have repeated bladder infections. Your provider may suggest that you: 
 
 Take a single dose of an antibiotic after sexual contact to prevent an infection. 
 Have a 3-day course of antibiotics at home to use if you develop an infection. 
 Take a single, daily dose of an antibiotic to prevent infections. 
 
 MORE SEVERE KIDNEY INFECTIONS You may need to go into the hospital if you are very sick and cannot take medicines by mouth or drink enough fluids. You may also be admitted to the hospital if you: 
 
 Are an older adult 
 Have kidney stones or changes in the anatomy of your urinary tract 
 Have recently had urinary tract surgery 
 Have cancer, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, or other medical problems 
 Are pregnant and have a fever or are otherwise ill 
 
 At the hospital, you will receive fluids and antibiotics through a vein. Some people have UTIs that do not go away with treatment or keep coming back. These are called chronic UTIs. If you have a chronic UTI, you may need stronger antibiotics or to take medicine for a longer time. You may need surgery if the infection is caused by a problem with the structure of the urinary tract. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most UTIs can be cured. Bladder infection symptoms most often go away within 24 to 48 hours after treatment begins. If you have a kidney infection, it may take 1 week or longer for symptoms to go away. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Possible Complications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Complications may include: 
 
 Life-threatening blood infection ( sepsis ). The risk is greater among the young, very old adults, and those whose bodies cannot fight infections (for example, due to HIV or cancer chemotherapy). 
 Kidney damage or scarring. 
 Kidney infection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact your provider if you have symptoms of a UTI. Call right away if you have signs of a possible kidney infection, such as: 
 
 Back or side pain 
 Chills 
 Fever 
 Vomiting 
 
 Also call if UTI symptoms come back shortly after you have been treated with antibiotics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prevention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and  lifestyle changes  may help prevent some UTIs. After menopause, a woman may use estrogen cream around the vagina to reduce infections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bladder infection - adults; UTI - adults; Cystitis - bacterial - adults; Pyelonephritis - adults; Kidney infection - adults 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, et al. International clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in women: A 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.  Clin Infect Dis . 2011;52(5):e103-e120. PMID: 21292654  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21292654 . Hooton TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD, et al. Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults: 2009 International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis . 2010;50(5):625-663. PMID: 20175247  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20175247 . Hooton TM. Nosocomial urinary tract infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 304. Sobel JD, Kaye D. Urinary tract infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 74. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bladder catheterization, female 
 Bladder catheterization, male 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Prevention of cystitis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Urinalysis 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Women's Health 
 Read more       
   
 
