
 Urine - abnormal color 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The usual color of urine is straw-yellow. Abnormally colored urine may be cloudy, dark, or blood-colored. Causes 
 
 Abnormal urine color may be caused by infection, disease, medicines, or food you eat. Cloudy or milky urine is a sign of a urinary tract infection, which may also cause a bad smell. Milky urine may also be caused by bacteria, crystals, fat, white or red blood cells, or mucus in the urine. Dark brown but clear urine is a sign of a liver disorder such as  acute viral hepatitis  or  cirrhosis , which causes excess bilirubin in the urine. Pink, red, or lighter brown urine can be caused by: Beets, blackberries, or certain food colorings Hemolytic anemia Injury to the kidneys or urinary tract Medicine Porphyria Urinary tract disorders that cause bleeding Blood from vaginal bleeding  Dark yellow or orange urine can be caused by: B complex vitamins or carotene Medicines such as phenazopyridine (used to treat urinary tract infections), rifampin, and warfarin Recent laxative use Green or blue urine is due to: Artificial colors in foods or drugs Bilirubin Medicines, including methylene blue Urinary tract infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider if you have: Abnormal urine color that cannot be explained and does not go away Blood in your urine, even once Clear, dark-brown urine Pink, red, or smoky-brown urine that is not due to a food or drug  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. This may include a rectal or pelvic exam. The provider will ask you questions about your symptoms such as:  When did you first notice a change in urine color and how long have you had the problem? What color is your urine and does the color change during the day? Do you see blood in the urine? Are there things that make the problem worse? What types of foods have you been eating and what medicines do you take? Have you had urinary or kidney problems in the past? Are you having any other symptoms (such as pain, fever, or increase in thirst)? Tests that may be done include: Blood tests, including  liver function tests Ultrasound  of kidneys and bladder Urinalysis Urine culture  for infection  Alternative Names 
 
 Discoloration of urine Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and the urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. Read More 
 
 Bladder stones 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Hepatitis B 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Urine - bloody  
 Wilms tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinalysis 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia