
 Urine - bloody  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blood in your urine is called hematuria. The amount may be very small and only detected with urine tests or under a microscope. In other cases, the blood is visible. It often turns the toilet water red or pink. Or, you may see spots of blood in the water after urinating. Causes 
 
 There are many possible causes of blood in the urine.  Bloody urine may be due to a problem in your kidneys or other parts of the urinary tract, such as: Cancer of the bladder or kidney Infection of the bladder , kidney, prostate, or  urethra Inflammation of the bladder, urethra, prostate, or kidney ( glomerulonephritis ) Injury to the bladder or kidney Kidney  or  bladder stones Kidney disease after strep throat ( post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis ), a common cause of blood in the urine in children Kidney failure Polycystic kidney disease Recent urinary tract procedure such as catheterization, circumcision, surgery, or  kidney biopsy If there is no structural or anatomical problem with your kidneys, urinary tract, prostate, or genitals, your doctor may check to see if you have a bleeding disorder. Causes may include: Bleeding disorders  (such as  hemophilia ) Blood clot in the kidneys Blood thinning medicines (such as aspirin or warfarin) Sickle cell disease Thrombocytopenia ( low numbers of platelets )  Blood that looks like it is in the urine may actually be coming from other sources, such as:  The vagina (in women) Ejaculation, often due to a prostate problem (in men) A bowel movement  The urine can also turn a red color from certain drugs, beets, or other foods. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 You may not see blood in your urine because it is a small amount and is microscopic. Your health care provider may find it while checking your urine during a routine exam.  Never ignore blood you see in the urine. Get checked by your provider, especially if you also have: Discomfort with urination Frequent urination Unexplained weight loss Urgent urination Call your provider right away if: You have fever, nausea, vomiting, shaking chills, or pain in your abdomen, side, or back You are unable to urinate You are passing blood clots in your urine  Also call if: You have pain with sexual intercourse or heavy menstrual bleeding. This may be due to a problem related to your reproductive system. You have urine dribbling, nighttime urination, or difficulty starting your urine flow. This may be from a prostate problem.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions such as:  When did you first notice blood in your urine? Has the amount of your urine increased or decreased? What is the color of your urine? Does your urine have an odor? Do you have any pain with urination or other symptoms of infection? Are you urinating more often, or is the need to urinate more urgent? What medicines are you taking?  Have you had urinary or kidney problems in the past, or recently had surgery or an injury?  Have you recently eaten foods that may cause a change in color, like beets, berries, or rhubarb? Tests that may be done include: Abdominal ultrasound Antinuclear antibody test for lupus Blood  creatinine  level Complete blood count  (CBC) CT scan of the abdomen Cystoscopy Kidney biopsy Strep test Tests for sickle cell, bleeding problems, and other blood disorders Urinalysis Urinary cytology Urine culture 24-hour urine collection for creatinine, protein, calcium Blood tests such as  PT ,  PTT  or INR tests The treatment will depend on the cause of blood in the urine. Alternative Names 
 
 Hematuria; Blood in the urine Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. Read More 
 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Bleeding 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Kidney Stones 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Urinalysis 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia