
 Urine collection - infants 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 It is sometimes necessary to get a urine sample from a baby to do testing. Most of the time, urine is collected in the health care provider's office. A sample can also be collected at home. How the Test is Performed 
 
 To collect a urine sample from an infant:  Thoroughly wash the area around the urethra (the hole where urine flows out). Use the soap, or cleansing wipes that your provider gave you.  You will be given a special bag to collect the urine. It will be a plastic bag with a sticky strip on one end, made to fit over your baby's genital area. Open this bag and place it on the infant. For males, place the entire penis in the bag and attach the adhesive to the skin. For females, place the bag over the two folds of skin on either side of the vagina (labia). Put a diaper on the baby (over the bag). Check the infant often, and change the bag after the infant has urinated. (An active infant can cause the bag to move, so it may take more than 1 try to collect the sample.)  Empty the urine from the bag into the container provided by your provider. Do NOT touch the inside of the cup or lid. If at home, place the container in a plastic bag in the refrigerator until you return it to your provider. When finished, label the container and return it as instructed. Thoroughly wash the area around the urethra. Clean from the front to the back on a female infant, and from the tip of the penis down on a male infant. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no preparation for the test. If you collect the urine at home, have some extra collection bags available. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed to get a urine sample from an infant. Normal Results 
 
 Normal values depend on what tests will be performed on the urine after it is collected. Risks 
 
 There are no major risks to the infant. Rarely, a mild skin rash from the adhesive on the collection bag may develop. References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient; history, physical examination, and urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia