
 Urticaria pigmentosa 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urticaria pigmentosa is a skin disease that produces patches of darker skin and very bad  itching . Hives can develop when these skin areas are rubbed.  Causes 
 
 Urticaria pigmentosa occurs when there are too many inflammatory cells (mast cells) in the skin. Mast cells are immune system cells that help the body fight infections. Mast cells make and release histamine, which causes nearby tissues to become swollen and inflamed.  Things that can trigger histamine release and skin symptoms include: Rubbing the skin Infections Exercise Drinking hot liquids, eating spicy food Sunlight, exposure to cold Drugs, such as aspirin or other NSAIDs, codeine, morphine, x-ray dye, some anesthesia drugs, alcohol Urticaria pigmentosa is most common in children. It can also occur in adults. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is brownish patches on the skin. These patches contain histamine. When histamine is triggered, the patches develop into hive-like bumps. Younger children may develop a  blister  that is filled with fluid if the bump is scratched. The face may also get red quickly. In severe cases, these symptoms may occur: Diarrhea Fainting  (uncommon) Headache Rapid heartbeat  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the skin. The provider may suspect urticarial pigmentosa when the skin patches are rubbed and raised bumps (hives) develop. This is called the Darier sign. Tests to check for this condition are: Skin biopsy  to look for a higher number of mast cells Urine histamine  Blood tests for blood cell counts and blood tryptase levels (tryptase is an enzyme found in mast cells) Treatment 
 
 Antihistamine medicines can help relieve symptoms such as itching and flushing. Talk to your provider about which type of antihistamine to use. Corticosteroids applied on the skin and light therapy can also be used in some cases. Your provider may prescribe other kinds of medicine to treat symptoms of severe and unusual forms of urticaria pigmentosa. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Urticaria pigmentosa goes away by puberty in about half of affected children. Symptoms usually get better in others as they grow into adulthood. In adults, urticaria pigmentosa can lead to systemic mastocytosis. This is a serious condition that can affect bones, the brain, nerves, and the digestive system. Possible Complications 
 
 The main problems are discomfort from itching and concern about the appearance of the spots. Other problems such as diarrhea and fainting are rare. Bee stings  may also cause a bad allergic reaction in people with urticaria pigmentosa. Ask your provider if you should carry an epinephrine kit to use if you get a bee sting. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice symptoms of urticaria pigmentosa. Alternative Names 
 
 Mastocytosis; Mastocytoma Images 
 
 
 Urticaria pigmentosa in the armpit 
 Mastocytosis - diffuse cutaneous 
 Urticaria pigmentosa on the chest 
 Urticaria pigmentosa - close-up 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Urticaria, angioedema, and pruritus. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 6. Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Cutaneous tumors and tumor syndromes. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.  Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 9. Read More 
 
 Bee poison 
 Fainting 
 Itching 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Rashes 
 Vesicles 
 
 Review Date 10/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Itching 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia