
 Uterine prolapse 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uterine prolapse occurs when the womb (uterus) drops down and presses into the vaginal area. Causes 
 
 Muscles, ligaments, and other structures hold the uterus in the pelvis. If these tissues are weak or stretched, the uterus drops into the vaginal canal. This is called prolapse. This condition is more common in women who have had 1 or more vaginal births. Other things that can cause or lead to uterine prolapse include: Normal aging Lack of estrogen after menopause  Conditions that put pressure on the pelvic muscles, such as chronic cough and obesity Pelvic tumor (rare) Repeated straining to have a bowel movement due to long-term constipation can make the problem worse.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Pressure or heaviness in the pelvis or vagina Problems with sexual intercourse Leaking urine or sudden urge to empty the bladder Low backache Uterus and cervix that bulge into the vaginal opening Repeated bladder infections Vaginal bleeding Increased vaginal discharge  Symptoms may be worse when you stand or sit for a long time. Exercise or lifting may also make symptoms worse. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a pelvic exam. You will be asked to bear down as if you are trying to push out a baby. This shows how far your uterus has dropped. Uterine prolapse is mild when the  cervix  drops into the lower part of the  vagina . Uterine prolapse is moderate when the cervix drops out of the vaginal opening.  Other things the pelvic exam may show are:  The bladder and front wall of the vagina are bulging into the vagina ( cystocele ). The rectum and back wall of the vagina (rectocele) are bulging into the vagina. The urethra and bladder are lower in the pelvis than usual.  Treatment 
 
 You do not need treatment unless you are bothered by the symptoms.  Many women will get treatment by the time the uterus drops to the opening of the vagina. LIFESTYLE CHANGES The following can help you control your symptoms: Lose weight if you are obese. Avoid heavy lifting or straining. Get treated for a chronic cough. If you cough is due to smoking, try to quit.  VAGINAL PESSARY Your provider may recommend placing a rubber or plastic donut-shaped device, into the vagina.This is called a pessary. This device holds the uterus in place.  The pessary may be used for short-term or long-term. The device is fitted for your vagina. Some pessaries are similar to a diaphragm used for birth control. Pessaries must be cleaned regularly. Sometimes they need to be cleaned by the provider. Many women can be taught how to insert, clean, and remove a pessary.  Side effects of pessaries include: Foul smelling discharge from the vagina Irritation of the lining of the vagina Ulcers in the vagina Problems with normal sexual intercourse  SURGERY Surgery should not be done until the prolapse symptoms are worse than the risks of having surgery. The type of surgery will depend on: The severity of the prolapse The woman's plans for future pregnancies The woman's age, health, and other medical problems The woman's desire to retain vaginal function  There are some surgical procedures that can be done without removing the uterus, such as a sacrospinous fixation. This procedure involves using nearby ligaments to support the uterus. Other procedures are also available. Often, a  vaginal hysterectomy  is used to correct uterine prolapse. Any sagging of the vaginal walls, urethra, bladder, or rectum can be surgically corrected at the same time. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most women with mild uterine prolapse do not have symptoms that require treatment. Vaginal pessaries can be effective for many women with uterine prolapse. Surgery often provides very good results. However, some women may need to have the treatment again in the future. Possible Complications 
 
 Ulceration and infection of the cervix and vaginal walls may occur in severe cases of uterine prolapse. Urinary tract infections  and other urinary symptoms may occur because of a cystocele.  Constipation  and  hemorrhoids  may occur because of a rectocele. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of uterine prolapse. Prevention 
 
 Tightening the pelvic floor muscles using  Kegel exercises  helps to strengthen the muscles and reduces the risk of uterine prolapse. Estrogen therapy after menopause may help with vaginal muscle tone.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pelvic relaxation - uterine prolapse; Pelvic floor hernia; Prolapsed uterus Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 Lentz GM. Anatomic defects of the abdominal wall and pelvic floor: abdominal and inguinal hernias, cystocele, urethrocele, enterocele, rectocele, uterine and vaginal prolapse: diagnosis and management. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 20. Maher CF, Karram M. Surgical procedures to suspend a prolapsed uterus. In: Karram M, Maher CF, eds.  Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 5. Payne CK. Conserative management of urinary incontinence. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 69. Winters JC, Togamai JM, Chermansky CJ. Vaginal and abdominal reconstructive surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Asthma 
 Constipation in infants and children 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pelvic Support Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia