
 Vaginitis test - wet mount 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The vaginitis wet mount test is a test to detect an infection of the vagina. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You lie on your back on the exam table. Your feet are supported by footrests.  The health care provider gently inserts an instrument (speculum) into the vagina to hold it open so the provider can see inside. A sterile, moist cotton swab is gently inserted into the vagina to take a sample of discharge.  The swab and speculum are removed. The discharge is sent to a lab. There, it is placed onto a slide. It is then viewed under a microscope and checked for signs of infection. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 In the 2 days before the test, DO NOT use creams or other medicines in the vagina. DO NOT douche. (You should never douche. Douching can cause infection of the vagina or uterus.)  How the Test will Feel 
 
 There may be slight discomfort when the speculum is inserted into the vagina. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test looks for the cause of vaginal irritation and discharge. Normal Results 
 
 A normal test result means there are no signs of an infection. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results mean there is an infection. The most common infections are due to one or a combination of the following: Bacterial vaginosis. Bacteria that normally live in the vagina overgrow, causing a heavy, white, fishy-smelling discharge and possibly a rash, painful intercourse, or odor after intercourse. Trichomoniasis , a sexually transmitted disease Vaginal yeast infection Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Wet prep Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 The wet mount vaginitis test 
 Uterus 
 Pap smear 
 References 
 
 Croft AC, Woods GL. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 63. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower and upper genital tracts: vulva, vagina, cervix, toxic shock syndrome, endometritis, and salpingitis. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL. eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Read More 
 
 Cervix 
 Trichomoniasis 
 Vaginal dryness 
 Vaginal itching and discharge - adult and adolescent 
 Vaginal yeast infection 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Trichomoniasis 
 Vaginitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia