
 Varnish poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Varnish is a clear liquid that is used as coating on woodwork and other products. Varnish poisoning occurs when someone swallows varnish. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Varnish contains both resins and solvents.  The harmful substances in the resins are: Amber Balsam Rosin Various substances produced from plants and insects (such as the lac insect and urethanes) The harmful substances in the solvents are: Ethanol Mineral spirits Turpentine Where Found 
 
 Some varnishes contain these substances. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of varnish poisoning in different parts of the body.  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns in the food pipe (esophagus) Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood KIDNEYS AND BLADDER Blood in the urine Kidneys stop working ( kidney failure )  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty)  HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly  NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) Dizziness Impaired memory Insomnia Irritability Loss of coordination Sensation of being drunk Severe brain damage Sleepiness Stupor (decreased level of consciousness) Walking difficulties  SKIN Burns Irritation  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the varnish is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the varnish, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in varnish fumes, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.  The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube down the throat into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray Endoscopy. Camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluid through the vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much varnish they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Varnish can cause extensive damage in the: Lungs Mouth Stomach Throat The outcome depends on the extent of this damage.  Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, or stomach. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection.  If varnish gets in the eye, sores may develop in the cornea, the clear part of the eye. This can cause blindness. References 
 
 Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 158. Mirkin DB. Benzene and related aromatic hydrocarbons. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 94. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia