
 Venipuncture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Venipuncture is the collection of blood from a vein. It is most often done for laboratory testing. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Most of the time, blood is drawn from a vein located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  The site is cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). An elastic band is put around the upper arm to apply pressure to the area. This makes the vein swell with blood. A needle is inserted into the vein. The blood collects into an airtight vial or tube attached to the needle. The elastic band is removed from your arm. The needle is taken out and the spot is covered with a bandage to stop bleeding.  In infants or young children, a sharp tool called a lancet may be used to puncture the skin and make it bleed. The blood collects onto a slide or test strip. A bandage may be placed over the area if there is any bleeding. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 The steps you need to take before the test will depend on the kind of blood test you are having. Many tests do not require special steps.  In some cases, your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test or if you need to be fasting. Do not stop or change your medications without talking to your provider first. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Blood is made up of two parts: Fluid (plasma or serum) Cells Plasma is the fluid part that contains substances such as glucose, electrolytes, proteins, and water. Serum is the fluid part that remains after the blood is allowed to clot in a test tube.  Cells in the blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, and  platelets . Blood helps move oxygen, nutrients, waste products, and other materials through the body. It helps control body temperature, fluid balance, and the body's acid-base balance. Tests on blood or parts of blood may give your doctor important clues about your health. Normal Results 
 
 Normal results vary with the specific test. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results vary with the specific test. Alternative Names 
 
 Blood-draw; Phlebotomy Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Harbert KR. Venipuncture. In: Dehn RW, Asprey DP, eds.  Essential Clinical Procedures . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 5. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Platelet count 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia