
 Vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders are conditions in which blood supply to the back of the brain is disrupted. Causes 
 
 Two vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery. These are the main blood vessels that provide blood flow to the back of the brain.  The areas in the back of the brain that receive blood from these arteries are needed to keep a person alive. These areas control breathing, heart rate, swallowing, vision, movement, and posture or balance. All of the nervous system signals that connect the brain to the rest of the body pass through the back of the brain. Many different conditions may reduce or stop blood flow in the back part of the brain. The most common are smoking, high blood pressure, diabetes, and a high cholesterol level. These are similar to the  risk factors for any stroke . Other causes include: Tear in the wall of an artery Blood clots in the heart that travel to the vertebrobasilar arteries and cause a stroke Blood vessel inflammation Connective tissue diseases Problems in the spinal bones of the neck Outside pressure on the vertebrobasilar arteries, such as from a salon sink (nicknamed beauty parlor syndrome) Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms may include: Difficulty pronouncing words, slurred speech Difficulty swallowing Double vision or vision loss Numbness or tingling, most often on the face or scalp Sudden falls (drop attacks) Vertigo (sensation of things spinning around) Memory loss  Other symptoms may include:  Bladder or bowel control problems Difficulty walking (unsteady gait) Headache Hearing loss Muscle weakness Nausea and vomiting Neck ache Pain in one or more parts of the body, which gets worse with touch and cold temperatures Poor coordination Sleepiness or sleep from which the person cannot be awakened Sudden, uncoordinated movements Sweating on the face, arms, or legs  Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have the following tests, depending on the cause: CT or  MRI  of the brain Computed tomography angiography (CTA), magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), or  ultrasound  to look at blood vessels in the brain Blood tests, including blood clotting studies Echocardiogram Electrocardiogram  (ECG) and  Holter monitor  (24-hour ECG) X-rays of the arteries ( angiogram )  Treatment 
 
 Vertebrobasilar symptoms that start suddenly are a medical emergency that need to be treated right away. Treatment is similar to that for  stroke . To  treat and prevent  the condition, your health care provider may recommend: Taking blood-thinning drugs, such as aspirin, warfarin (Coumadin), or clopidogrel (Plavix) to lower the risk for stroke Changing your diet Medicine to lower cholesterol and better control blood pressure Exercising Losing weight Stopping smoking  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on: The amount of brain damage What body functions have been affected How quickly you get treatment How quickly you recover  Each person has a different recovery time and need for long-term care. Problems with moving, thinking, and talking often improve in the first weeks or months. Some people will keep improving for months or years. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders are stroke and its complications. These include: Breathing (respiratory) failure (which may require the use of a machine to help the person breathe) Lung problems (especially lung infections) Heart attack Lack of fluids in the body (dehydration) and swallowing problems (sometimes requiring tube feeding) Problems with movement or sensation, including paralysis and numbness Formation of clots in the legs Vision loss  Complications caused by medicines or surgery may also occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or your local emergency number, or get to the emergency room if you have any symptoms of a vertebrobasilar circulatory disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Vertebrobasilar insufficiency; Posterior circulation ischemia; Beauty parlor syndrome; TIA - vertebrobasilar insufficiency; Dizziness - vertebrobasilar insufficiency; Vertigo - vertebrobasilar insufficiency Images 
 
 
 Vertebral column 
 Arteries of the brain 
 References 
 
 Correia PN, Meyer IA, Eskandari A, Michel P. Beauty parlor stroke revisited: an 11-year single-center consecutive series.  Int J Stroke . 2016;11(3):356-360. PMID: 26763920  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26763920 . Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.  Stroke . 2014;45(7):2160-2236. PMID: 24788967  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24788967 . Kim JS, Caplan LR. Vertebrobasilar disease. In: Grotta JC, Albers GW, Broderick JP, et al, eds.  Stroke: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 26. Stayman A, Nogueira RG, Gupta R. Diagnosis and management of vertebrobasilar insufficiency.  Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med . 2013;15(2):240-251. PMID: 23378181  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23378181 . Read More 
 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Stroke 
 Transient Ischemic Attack 
 Browse the Encyclopedia