
 Visceral larva migrans 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Visceral larva migrans is a human infection with certain parasites found in the intestines of dogs and cats. Causes 
 
 Visceral larva migrans (VLM) is caused by roundworms (parasites) that are found in the intestines of dogs and cats.  Eggs produced by these worms are in the feces of the infected animals. The feces mix with soil. Humans can get sick if they accidentally eat soil that has the eggs in it. This can happen by eating fruit or vegetables that were in contact with infected soil and were not washed thoroughly before eating. People can also become infected by eating raw liver from a chicken, lamb, or cow. Young children with  pica  are at high risk of getting VLM. Pica is a disorder involving eating inedible things such as dirt and paint. Most infections in the United States occur in children who play in areas, such as sandboxes, which contain soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. After the worm eggs are swallowed, they break open in the intestine. The worms travel throughout the body to various organs, such as the lungs, liver, and eyes. They may also travel to the brain and heart. Symptoms 
 
 Mild infections may not cause symptoms. Serious infections may cause these symptoms: Abdominal pain Cough Fever Irritability 
 Itchy skin (hives) Shortness of breath Wheezing If the eyes are infected, loss of vision and crossed eyes can occur. Exams and Tests 
 
 If you have visceral larva migrans, you may have a high level of white blood cells. People with this condition may also have signs of a: Swollen liver Rash Lung or eye problem  Tests may include: Complete blood count with differential Blood tests to detect antibodies to  Toxocara Treatment 
 
 This infection usually goes away on its own and may not require treatment. Some people need to take anti-parasitic drugs. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Severe infections involving the brain or heart can result in death, but this is rare. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur from the infection: Blindness Worsened eyesight Encephalitis (infection of the brain) Heart rhythm problems Difficulty breathing  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you develop any of these symptoms: Cough Difficulty breathing Eye problems Fever Rash  A full medical exam is needed to rule out visceral larva migrans. Many conditions cause similar symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Prevention includes deworming dogs and cats and preventing them from defecating in public areas. Children should be kept away from areas where dogs and cats may defecate.  It is very important to wash your hands thoroughly after touching soil or after touching cats or dogs. Teach your children to wash their hands thoroughly after being outdoors or after touching cats or dogs. DO NOT eat raw liver from a chicken, lamb, or cow. Alternative Names 
 
 Toxocariasis; Ocular larva migrans; Larva migrans visceralis Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Despommier DD, Hotez PJ. Tissue nematodes. In: Long SL, ed.  Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 277. Diemert DJ. Tissue nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 366. Nash TE. Visceral larvae migrans and other unusual helminth infections. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill-Livingstone; 2014:chap 292. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Pica 
 Respiratory 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia