
 Vitamin K deficiency bleeding of the newborn 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vitamin K  deficiency bleeding of the newborn (VKDB) is a bleeding disorder in babies. It most often develops shortly after a baby is born. Causes 
 
 A lack of vitamin K may cause severe bleeding in newborn babies. Vitamin K plays an important role in blood clotting. Babies often have a low level of vitamin K for a variety of reasons. Vitamin K does not move easily across the placenta from the mother to the baby. As a result, a newborn does not have much vitamin K stored up at birth. Also, the bacteria that help make vitamin K are not yet present in a newborn's gastrointestinal tract. Finally, there is not much vitamin K in mother's milk. Your baby may develop this condition if: A preventive vitamin K shot is not given at birth (if vitamin K is given by mouth instead of as a shot, it must be given more than once, and it does not appear to be as effective as the shot). You take certain anti-seizure or blood thinning drugs  The condition is grouped into three categories: Early onset VKDB is very rare. It occurs during the first hours after birth and within 24 hours. Use of anti-seizure medicines or some other medicines, including a blood thinner called Coumadin, during pregnancy is a common cause. Classic onset disease occurs between 24 hours and 7 days after birth. It may be seen in breastfed infants who did not receive a vitamin K shot within the first week after birth, especially those for whom feedings were delayed initially. It is also rare. Late onset VKDB is seen in infants between 2 weeks and 2 months old. It is more common in children who did not receive a vitamin K shot.  Newborns and infants with the following problems involving the gastrointestinal tract are more likely to develop this disorder: Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency Biliary atresia Celiac disease Cystic fibrosis Diarrhea Hepatitis  Symptoms 
 
 The condition causes bleeding. The most common areas of bleeding include: A boy's penis, if he has been circumcised Belly button area Gastrointestinal tract (may result in blood in the baby's bowel movements) Mucus membranes (such as the lining of the nose and mouth) Places where there has been a needle stick  There may also be: Blood in the urine Bruising Seizures  (convulsions) or abnormal behavior  Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood clotting tests will be done. The diagnosis is confirmed if a vitamin K shot stops the bleeding and blood clotting time (prothrombin time) is within normal limits. Treatment 
 
 Vitamin K is given if bleeding occurs. Babies with severe bleeding may need plasma or blood transfusions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook tends to be worse for babies with late onset hemorrhagic disease than other forms. There is a higher rate of bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage) associated with the late onset condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage), with possible brain damage Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your baby has any unexplained bleeding. Prevention 
 
 The early onset form of the disease may be prevented by giving vitamin K shots to pregnant women who take anti-seizure medications. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends giving every baby a shot of vitamin K immediately after birth. This practice has helped prevent the classic and late-onset forms of the condition, which is now rare in the U.S. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn (HDN) References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Notes from the field: late vitamin K deficiency bleeding in infants whose parents declined vitamin K prophylaxis--Tennessee, 2013.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2013;62(45):901-902. PMID: 24226627  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24226627 .
 Greenbaum LA. Vitamin K deficiency. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 53. Weddle M, Empy A, Crossen E, et al. Are pediatricians complicit in vitamin K deficiency bleeding?  Pediatrics.  2015;136(4):753-757. PMID: 26371205  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26371205 . 
 Review Date 11/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G. Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Vitamin K 
 Browse the Encyclopedia