
 Vitamins 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vitamins are a group of substances that are needed for normal cell function, growth, and development. There are 13 essential vitamins. This means that these vitamins are required for the body to work properly. They are: Vitamin A Vitamin C Vitamin D Vitamin E Vitamin K Vitamin B1 ( thiamine ) Vitamin B2 ( riboflavin ) Vitamin B3 ( niacin ) Pantothenic acid Biotin  (B7) Vitamin B6 Vitamin B12  (cyanocobalamin) Folate (folic acid and B9)  Vitamins are grouped into two categories: Fat-soluble vitamins are stored in the body's fatty tissue. The four fat-soluble vitamins are vitamins A, D, E, and K. These vitamins are absorbed more easily by the body in the presence of dietary fat. There are nine water-soluble vitamins. The body must use water-soluble vitamins right away. Any leftover water-soluble vitamins leave the body through the urine. Vitamin B12 is the only water-soluble vitamin that can be stored in the liver for many years. Function 
 
 Each of the vitamins listed below has an important job in the body. A vitamin deficiency occurs when you do not get enough of a certain vitamin. Vitamin deficiency can cause health problems. Not eating enough fruits, vegetables, beans, lentils, whole grains and fortified dairy foods may increase your risk for health problems, including heart disease, cancer, and poor bone health ( osteoporosis ). Vitamin A  helps form and maintain healthy teeth, bones, soft tissue, mucus membranes, and skin. Vitamin B6  is also called pyridoxine. Vitamin B6 helps form red blood cells and maintain brain function. This vitamin also plays an important role in the proteins that are part of many chemical reactions in the body. The more  protein  you eat the more pyridoxine your body requires. Vitamin B12 , like the other B vitamins, is important for metabolism. It also helps form red blood cells and maintain the  central nervous system . Vitamin C , also called ascorbic acid, is an antioxidant that promotes healthy teeth and gums. It helps the body absorb iron and maintain healthy tissue. It also promotes wound healing. Vitamin D  is also known as the "sunshine vitamin," since it is made by the body after being in the sun. Ten to 15 minutes of sunshine three times a week is enough to produce the body's requirement of vitamin D for most people at most latitudes. People who do not live in sunny places may not make enough vitamin D. It is very hard to get enough vitamin D from food sources alone. Vitamin D helps the body absorb calcium. You need calcium for the normal development and maintenance of healthy teeth and bones. It also helps maintain proper blood levels of  calcium  and  phosphorus . Vitamin E  is an antioxidant also known as tocopherol. It helps the body form red blood cells and use vitamin K. Vitamin K  is not listed among the essential vitamins, but without it blood would not stick together (coagulate). Some studies suggest that it is important for bone health. Biotin  is essential for the metabolism of proteins and carbohydrates, and in the production of hormones and cholesterol. Niacin  is a B vitamin that helps maintain healthy skin and nerves. It is also has cholesterol-lowering effects. Folate  works with vitamin B12 to help form red blood cells. It is needed for the production of DNA, which controls tissue growth and cell function. Any woman who is pregnant should be sure to get enough folate. Low levels of folate are linked to birth defects such as  spina bifida . Many foods are now fortified with folic acid. Pantothenic acid  is essential for the metabolism of food. It also plays a role in the production of hormones and cholesterol. Riboflavin  (vitamin B2) works with the other B vitamins. It is important for body growth and the production of red blood cells. Thiamine  (vitamin B1) helps the body cells change  carbohydrates  into energy. Getting plenty of carbohydrates is very important during pregnancy and breast-feeding. It is also essential for heart function and healthy nerve cells.  Food Sources 
 
 FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMINS Vitamin A: Dark-colored fruit Dark leafy vegetables Egg yolk Fortified milk and dairy products (cheese, yogurt, butter, and cream) Liver, beef, and fish  Vitamin D: Fish (fatty fish such as salmon, mackerel, herring, and orange roughy) Fish liver oils (cod's liver oil) Fortified cereals Fortified milk and dairy products (cheese, yogurt, butter, and cream)  Vitamin E: Avocado Dark green vegetables (spinach, broccoli, asparagus, and turnip greens) Margarine (made from safflower, corn, and sunflower oil) Oils (safflower, corn, and sunflower) Papaya and mango Seeds and nuts Wheat germ and wheat germ oil  Vitamin K: Cabbage Cauliflower Cereals Dark green vegetables (broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and asparagus) Dark leafy vegetables (spinach, kale, collards, and turnip greens) Fish, liver, beef, and eggs  WATER-SOLUBLE VITAMINS Biotin: Chocolate Cereal Egg yolk Legumes Milk Nuts Organ meats (liver, kidney) Pork Yeast  Folate: Asparagus and broccoli Beets Brewer's yeast Dried beans (cooked pinto, navy, kidney, and lima) Fortified cereals Green, leafy vegetables (spinach and romaine lettuce) Lentils Oranges and orange juice Peanut butter Wheat germ  Niacin (vitamin B3): Avocado Eggs Enriched breads and fortified cereals Fish (tuna and salt-water fish) Lean meats Legumes Nuts Potato Poultry  Pantothenic acid: Avocado Broccoli, kale, and other vegetables in the cabbage family Eggs Legumes and lentils Milk Mushroom Organ meats Poultry White and sweet potatoes Whole-grain cereals  Thiamine (vitamin B1): Dried milk Egg Enriched bread and flour Lean meats Legumes (dried beans) Nuts and seeds Organ meats Peas Whole grains  Pyroxidine (vitamin B6): Avocado Banana Legumes (dried beans) Meat Nuts Poultry Whole grains (milling and processing removes a lot of this vitamin)  Vitamin B12: Meat Eggs Fortified foods such as soymilk Milk and milk products Organ meats (liver and kidney) Poultry Shellfish  NOTE: Animal sources of vitamin B12 are absorbed much better by the body than plant sources Vitamin C (ascorbic acid): Broccoli Brussels sprouts Cabbage Cauliflower Citrus fruits Potatoes Spinach Strawberries Tomato juice Tomatoes  Side Effects 
 
 Many people think that if some is good, a lot is better. This is not always the case. High doses of certain vitamins can be toxic. Ask your health care provider what is best for you. Recommendations 
 
 The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for vitamins reflect how much of each vitamin most people should get each day. The RDA for vitamins may be used as goals for each person. How much of each vitamin you need depends on your age and gender. Other factors, such as pregnancy and your health, are also important.  The best way to get all the daily vitamins you need is to eat a balanced diet that contains a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, fortified dairy foods, legumes (dried beans), lentils, and whole grains.  Dietary supplements are another way to get the vitamins you need if the food you eat is not supplying enough vitamins. Supplements can be helpful during pregnancy and for special medical problems. If you take supplements, DO NOT take more than 100% of the RDA. Be very careful about taking large amounts of fat-soluble vitamin supplements. These include vitamins A, D, E, and K. These vitamins are stored in fat cells, and they can build up in your body and may cause harmful effects. Images 
 
 
 Fruits and vegetables 
 References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 1998. PMID: 23193625  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23193625 .  Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenium, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 2001. PMID: 25057538  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057538 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Salwen MJ. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Calcium in diet 
 Carbohydrates 
 Central nervous system 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Metabolism 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Niacin 
 Pantothenic acid and biotin 
 Phosphorus in diet 
 Protein in diet 
 Retina 
 Riboflavin 
 Thiamin 
 Vitamin A 
 Vitamin B12 
 Vitamin B6 
 Vitamin C 
 Vitamin D 
 Vitamin E 
 Vitamin K 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vitamins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia