
 Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anemia is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. There are many types of anemia. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is a low red blood cell count due to a lack (deficiency) of  vitamin B12 . Causes 
 
 Your body needs vitamin B12 to make red blood cells. In order to provide vitamin B12 to your cells: You must eat plenty of foods that contain vitamin B12, such as meat, poultry, shellfish, eggs, and dairy products. Your body must absorb enough vitamin B12. A special protein, called intrinsic factor, helps your body do this. This protein is released by cells in the stomach.  A lack of vitamin B12 may be due to dietary factors, including: Eating a poorly planned vegetarian diet Poor diet in infants Poor nutrition during pregnancy  Certain health conditions can make it difficult for your body to absorb enough vitamin B12. They include: Chronic alcoholism Crohn disease, celiac disease, infection with the fish tapeworm, or other problems that make it difficult for your body to digest foods Pernicious anemia, a type of vitamin B12 anemia that occurs when your body destroys cells that make intrinsic factor Surgery that removes certain parts of your stomach or small intestine, such as some weight-loss surgeries Taking antacids and other heartburn medicines for a long period of time  Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms. Symptoms may be mild.  Symptoms can include:  Diarrhea  or constipation Fatigue , lack of energy, or lightheadedness when standing up or with exertion Loss of appetite Pale  skin Problems concentrating Shortness of breath , mostly during exercise Swollen, red tongue or bleeding gums  If you have low vitamin B12 level for a long time, you can have nerve damage. Symptoms of nerve damage include:  Confusion or change in mental status ( dementia ) in severe cases Depression Loss of balance Numbness and tingling of hands and feet  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may reveal problems with your reflexes.  Tests that may be done include:  Complete blood count ( CBC ) Reticulocyte count Lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) level Vitamin B12 level Methylmalonic acid ( MMA ) level Other procedures that may be done include: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy ( EGD ) to examine the stomach Enteroscopy  to examine the small intestine Bone marrow biopsy  if the diagnosis is not clear Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of B12 deficiency anemia.  The goal of treatment is to increase your vitamin B12 level. Treatment may include a shot of vitamin B12 once a month. If you have a very low level of B12, you may need more shots in the beginning. It is possible you may need shots every month for the rest of your life.  Some people may also need to take vitamin B12 supplements by mouth. Treatment may no longer be needed after Crohn disease, celiac disease, or alcohol use is properly treated. Your provider will also recommend that you eat a variety of foods. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this type of anemia often do well with treatment. Long-term vitamin B12 deficiency can cause nerve damage. This may be permanent if you do not start treatment within 6 months of when your symptoms begin. Possible Complications 
 
 A woman with a low B12 level may have a false positive Pap smear. This is because vitamin B12 deficiency affects the way certain cells (epithelial cells) in the cervix look. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have any of the symptoms of anemia. Prevention 
 
 You can prevent anemia caused by a lack of vitamin B12 by eating a well-balanced diet. Shots of vitamin B12 can prevent anemia after surgeries known to cause vitamin B12 deficiency. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment can reduce or prevent complications related to a low vitamin B12 level. Alternative Names 
 
 Megaloblastic macrocytic anemia Images 
 
 
 Megaloblastic anemia - view of red blood cells 
 Hypersegmented PMN (Close-up) 
 References 
 
 Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 37. Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 158. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Chronic 
 Crohn disease 
 Intrinsic factor 
 Malabsorption 
 Pap test 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Vitamin B12 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 B Vitamins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia