
 Vitamin B6 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vitamin B6 is a water-soluble vitamin. Water-soluble vitamins dissolve in water so the body cannot store them. Leftover amounts of the vitamin leave the body through the urine. That means you need a regular supply of these vitamins in your diet.  Function 
 
 Vitamin B6 helps the body to: Make  antibodies . Antibodies are needed to fight many diseases. Maintain normal nerve function. Make hemoglobin. Hemoglobin carries oxygen in the red blood cells to the tissues. A vitamin B6 deficiency can cause a form of  anemia . Break down  proteins . The more protein you eat, the more vitamin B6 you need. Keep blood sugar (glucose) in normal ranges.  Food Sources 
 
 Vitamin B6 is found in: Avocado Banana Legumes (dried beans) Beef and pork Nuts Poultry Whole grains and fortified cereals Corn  Fortified breads and cereals may also contain vitamin B6. Fortified means that a vitamin or mineral has been added to the food. Side Effects 
 
 Large doses of vitamin B6 can cause: Difficulty coordinating movement Numbness Sensory changes  Deficiency of this vitamin can cause: Confusion Depression Irritability Mouth and tongue sores also known as glossitis Peripheral neuropathy  (Vitamin B6 deficiency is not common in the United States.) Recommendations 
 
 The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for vitamins reflects how much of each vitamin people should receive on a daily basis. The RDA for vitamins may be used to help create goals for each person. How much of each vitamin is needed depends on a person's age and gender. Other factors, such as pregnancy and illnesses, are also important. Ask your health care provider which amount is best for you. Dietary Reference Intakes for vitamin B6: Infants 0 to 6 months: 0.1* milligrams per day (mg/day) 7 to 12 months: 0.3* mg/day  *Adequate intake (AI) Children 1 to 3 years: 0.5 mg/day 4 to 8 years: 0.6 mg/day 9 to 13 years: 1.0 mg/day  Adolescents and Adults Males age 14 to 50 years: 1.3 mg/day Males over 50 years: 1.7 mg/day Females age 14 to 18 years: 1.2 mg/day Females age 19 to 50 years: 1.3 mg/day Females over 50 years: 1.5 mg/day Females of all ages 1.9 mg/day during pregnancy and 2.0 mg/day during lactation  The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods. Alternative Names 
 
 Pyridoxal; Pyridoxine; Pyridoxamine Images 
 
 
 Vitamin B6 benefit 
 Vitamin B6 source 
 References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1998. PMID: 23193625  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23193625 . Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Salwen MJ. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 B Vitamins 
 Browse the Encyclopedia