
 Voiding cystourethrogram 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A voiding cystourethrogram is an  x-ray  study of the bladder and urethra. It is done while the bladder is emptying.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed in a hospital radiology department or in a health care provider's office.  You will lie on your back on the x-ray table. A thin, flexible tube called a catheter will be inserted into the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body) and passed into the bladder. Contrast dye flows through the catheter into the bladder. This dye helps the bladder show up better on x-ray images. The x-rays are taken from various angles while the bladder is full of contrast dye. The catheter is removed so that you can urinate. Images are taken while you empty your bladder. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must sign a consent form. You will be given a gown to wear. Remove all jewelry before the test. Inform the provider if you are: Allergic to any medications Allergic to x-ray contrast material Pregnant  How the Test Will Feel 
 
 You may feel some discomfort when the catheter is placed and while your bladder is full. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to diagnose the cause of urinary tract infections, especially in children who have had more than one urinary tract or bladder infection. It is also used to diagnose and evaluate: Difficulty emptying the bladder Birth defects with the bladder or urethra Narrowing of the tube that carries urine out of the bladder 
  ( urethral stricture ) in males Urinary reflux from the bladder up into the kidney Normal Results 
 
 The bladder and urethra will be normal in size and function. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may indicate the following: Bladder does not empty properly because of a brain or nerve problem
   (neurogenic bladder) Large prostate gland Narrowing or scarring of the urethra Pouch-like sacs (diverticula) on the walls of the bladder or urethra Ureterocele Urinary reflux nephropathy Risks 
 
 You may have some discomfort when urinating after this test because of irritation from the catheter. You may have bladder spasms after this test, which may be a sign of an  allergic reaction  to the contrast dye. Contact your health care provider if bothersome bladder spasms occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Cystourethrogram - voiding Images 
 
 
 Voiding cystourethrogram 
 Cystography 
 References 
 
 Fulgham PF, Bishoff JT. Urinary tract imaging: Basic principles. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Autonomic neuropathy 
 Enlarged prostate 
 Neurogenic bladder 
 Reflux nephropathy 
 Ureterocele 
 Urethral stricture 
 Urge incontinence 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, Urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia