
 Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (WFS) is a collection of symptoms resulting from the failure of the adrenal glands to function normally as a result of bleeding into the gland. Causes 
 
 The  adrenal glands  are 2 triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands produce and release different hormones that the body needs to function normally. The adrenal glands can be affected by many diseases, such as infections like WFS. WFS is caused by severe infection with meningococcus bacteria or other severe infection from bacteria, such as: Group B streptococcus Pseudomonas aeruginosa Streptococcus pneumoniae Staphylococcus aureus Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms and signs usually come on very suddenly. They are due to the bacteria growing (multiplying) inside the body. Symptoms include: Fever and chills Joint and muscle pain Headache Vomiting Infection with bacteria causes bleeding throughout the body, which causes: Bodywide rash Disseminated intravascular coagulation  in which small blood clots cut off blood supply to the organs Septic shock Bleeding into the adrenal glands causes adrenal crisis, in which not enough adrenal hormones are produced. This leads to symptoms such as: Dizziness, weakness Very low blood pressure Very fast heart rate Confusion or coma Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about the person’s symptoms. Blood tests will be done to help confirm if the infection is caused by bacteria. Tests may include: Blood culture Complete blood count with differential Blood clotting studies If the provider suspects the infection is caused by meningococcus bacteria, other tests that may be done include: Lumbar puncture  to get a sample of spinal fluid for culture Skin biopsy  and  Gram stain Urine analysis Tests that may be ordered to help diagnose acute adrenal crisis include: ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation test Cortisol blood test Blood sugar Potassium blood test Sodium blood test Blood pH test Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves giving antibiotics as soon as possible to treat the bacterial infection. Glucocorticoid medicines will also be given to treat adrenal gland problem. Supportive treatments will be needed for other symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 WFS is fatal unless treatment for the bacterial infection is started right away. Prevention 
 
 To prevent WFS caused by meningococcal bacteria, a  vaccine  is available. Alternative Names 
 
 Fulminant meningococcemia - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Fulminant meningococcal sepsis - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Hemorrhagic adrenalitis Images 
 
 
 Meningococcal lesions on the back 
 Adrenal gland hormone secretion 
 References 
 
 Stephens DS, Apicella MA. Neisseri meningitides. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 213. Stewart PM. Krone NP. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 11/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adrenal Gland Disorders 
 Meningitis 
 Meningococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia