
 Weight gain - unintentional 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Unintentional weight gain is when you gain weight without trying to do so and you are not eating or drinking more. Causes 
 
 Gaining weight when you are not trying to do so can have many causes.  Metabolism slows down as you  age . This can cause weight gain if you eat too much, eat the wrong foods, or do not get enough exercise. Drugs that can cause weight gain include:  Birth control pills  Corticosteroids  Some drugs used to treat bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and depression Some drugs used to treat diabetes Hormone changes or medical problems can also cause unintentional weight gain. This may be due to: Cushing syndrome Underactive thyroid, or low thyroid (hypothyroidism) Polycystic ovary syndrome Menopause Pregnancy Bloating, or swelling due to a  buildup of fluid in the tissues  can cause weight gain. This may be due to menstruation, heart or kidney failure, preeclampsia, or medicines you take. A rapid weight gain may be a sign of dangerous fluid retention. If you quit smoking, you might gain weight. Most people who quit smoking gain 4 to 10 pounds (2 to 4.5 kilograms) in the first 6 months after quitting. Some gain as much as 25 to 30 pounds (11 to 14 kilograms). This weight gain is not simply due to eating more. Home Care 
 
 A healthy  diet and exercise program  can help you manage your weight. Talk to your health care provider or a dietitian about how to make a healthy eating plan and set realistic weight goals.  Do not stop any medicines that may be causing the weight gain without talking with your provider. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have the following symptoms with the weight gain:  Constipation Excessive weight gain without a known cause Hair loss Feel cold more often than before Swollen feet and  shortness of breath Uncontrollable  hunger  accompanied by  palpitations , tremor, and  sweating Vision changes  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and calculate your  body mass index (BMI) . The provider may also ask questions, such as: How much weight have you gained? Did you gain the weight quickly or slowly? Are you anxious, depressed, or under stress? Do you have a history of depression? What medicines do you take? What other symptoms do you have? You may have the following tests: Blood tests  Tests to measure hormone levels Nutritional assessment  Your provider may suggest a diet and exercise program or refer you to a dietitian. Weight gain caused by stress or feeling sad may require counseling. If weight gain is caused by a physical illness, treatment (if there is any) for the underlying cause will be prescribed. Images 
 
 
 Aerobic exercise 
 Isometric exercise 
 Calories and fat per serving 
 References 
 
 Boham E, Stone PM, DeBusk R. Obesity. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 36. Seagle HM, Strain GW, Makris A, et al. Position of the American Dietetic Association: weight management.  J Am Diet Assoc . 2009;109:330-46. PMID: 19244669  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19244669 . Read More 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Metabolism 
 Overweight 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Body Weight 
 Browse the Encyclopedia