
 Wheezing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Wheezing is a high-pitched whistling sound during breathing. It occurs when air moves through narrowed breathing tubes in the lungs. Considerations 
 
 Wheezing is a sign that a person may be having breathing problems. The sound of wheezing is most obvious when breathing out (exhaling). It may also be heard when breathing in (inhaling). Wheezing most often comes from the small breathing tubes (bronchial tubes) deep in the lungs. But it may be due to a blockage in larger airways or in persons with certain vocal cord problems. Causes 
 
 Causes of wheezing may include any of the following: Asthma Breathing a foreign object into the airways to the lungs Damage and widening of the large airways in the lungs ( bronchiectasis ) Swelling and mucus buildup in the smallest air passages in the lungs ( bronchiolitis ) Swelling and mucus buildup in the main passages that carry air to the lungs ( bronchitis ) COPD, especially when a respiratory infection is present Acid reflux disease Heart failure (cardiac asthma) Insect sting that causes an  allergic reaction Certain medicines (particularly aspirin) Infection of the lungs ( pneumonia ) Smoking Viral infection, especially in infants younger than age 2 Home Care 
 
 Take all of your medicines as directed. Sitting in an area where there is moist, heated air may help relieve some symptoms. This can be done by running a hot shower or using a vaporizer. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if wheezing: Occurs for the first time Occurs with significant  shortness of breath ,  bluish skin , confusion, or  mental status changes Keeps occurring without explanation Is caused by an allergic reaction to a bite or medicine If wheezing is severe or occurs with severe shortness of breath, you should go directly to the nearest emergency department. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Questions about your wheezing may include when it started, how long it has lasted, when it is worse, and what might have caused it. The physical exam may include listening to the lung sounds ( auscultation ). If your child has the symptoms, the provider will make sure your child didn't swallow a foreign object. Tests that may be done include: Blood work, possibly including  arterial blood gases Chest x-ray Lung function tests  A hospital stay may be needed if: Breathing is particularly difficult Medicines need to be given through a vein (IV) Supplemental oxygen is required The person needs to be closely watched by medical personnel Alternative Names 
 
 Sibilant rhonchi; Wheezing asthma; Wheezing - bronchiectasis; Wheezing - bronchiolitis; Wheezing - bronchitis; Wheezing - COPD; Wheezing - heart failure Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 References 
 
 Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF. Wheezing, bronchiolitis, and bronchitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 391. Woodruff PG, Bhakta NR, Fahy JV. Asthma: pathogenesis and phenotypes. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 41. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Asthma and school 
 Asthma - control drugs 
 Asthma - quick-relief drugs  
 Exercise-induced asthma 
 How to use a nebulizer 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Asthma 
 Asthma in Children 
 Breathing Problems 
 Drug Reactions 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia