
 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is a condition in which there is an extra electrical pathway in the heart. The condition can lead to periods of rapid heart rate ( tachycardia ). WPW syndrome is one of the most common causes of fast heart rate problems in infants and children. Causes 
 
 Normally, electrical signals follow a certain pathway through the heart. This helps the heart beat regularly. This prevents the heart from having extra beats or beats happening too soon.  In people with WPW syndrome, some of the heart's electrical signals go down an extra pathway. This may cause a very rapid heart rate called supraventricular tachycardia. Most people with WPW syndrome do not have any other heart problems. However, this condition has been linked with other cardiac conditions, such as  Ebstein anomaly . A form of the condition also runs in families. Symptoms 
 
 How often a rapid heart rate occurs varies depending on the person. Some people with WPW syndrome have only a few episodes of rapid heart rate. Others may have the rapid heart rate once or twice a week or more. Also, there may be no symptoms at all, so that condition is found when a heart test is done for another reason. A person with this syndrome may have: Chest pain  or chest tightness Dizziness Lightheadedness Fainting Palpitations  (a sensation of feeling your heart beating, usually quickly or irregularly) Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam done during a tachycardia episode will show a heart rate faster than 100 beats per minute. A normal heart rate is 60 to 100 beats per minute in adults, and under 150 beats per minute in newborns, infants, and small children. Blood pressure will be normal or low in most cases.  If the person is not having tachycardia at the time of the exam, the results may be normal. The condition may be diagnosed with an ECG or with continuous or person triggered ambulatory ECG monitoring, such as a  Holter monitor . A test called an electrophysiologic study ( EPS ) is done using catheters that are placed in the heart. This test may help identify the location of the extra electrical pathway.  Treatment 
 
 Medicines, particularly antiarrhythmic drugs such as procainamide or amiodarone, may be used to control or prevent a rapid heartbeat.  If the heart rate does not return to normal with medical treatment, doctors may use a type of therapy called electrical  cardioversion  (shock). The long-term treatment for WPW syndrome is very often  catheter ablation . This procedure involves inserting a tube (catheter) into a vein through a small cut near the groin up to the heart area. When the tip reaches the heart, the small area that is causing the fast heart rate is destroyed using a special type of energy called radiofrequency or by freezing it (cryoablation). Open heart surgery  to burn or freeze the extra pathway may also provide a permanent cure for WPW syndrome. In most cases, this procedure is done only if you need heart surgery for other reasons. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Catheter ablation cures this disorder in most people. The success rate for the procedure ranges between 85% to 95%. Success rates will vary depending on the location and number of extra pathways. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Complications of surgery Heart failure Reduced blood pressure (caused by  rapid heart rate ) Side effects of medicines  The most severe form of a rapid heartbeat is  ventricular fibrillation  (VF), which may rapidly lead to shock or death. It can sometimes occur in people with WPW, particularly if they also have  atrial fibrillation (AF) , which is another type of abnormal heart rhythm. This type of rapid heartbeat requires emergency treatment and a procedure called cardioversion.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if:  You have symptoms of WPW syndrome. You have this disorder and symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment.  Talk to your provider about whether your family members should be screened for inherited forms of this condition.  Alternative Names 
 
 Preexcitation syndrome; WPW; Tachycardia - Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome; Arrhythmia - WPW; Abnormal heart rhythm - WPW; Rapid heartbeat - WPW Images 
 
 
 Ebstein's anomaly 
 Holter heart monitor 
 Conduction system of the heart 
 References 
 
 Olgin JE, Zipes DP. Specific arrhythmias: diagnosis and treatment. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 37. Van Hare GF. Disturbances of rate and rhythm of the heart. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 435. Zimetbaum P. Cardiac arrhythmias with supraventricular origin. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Heart pacemaker 
 Pulse 
 Pulse - bounding 
 
 Review Date 2/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arrhythmia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia