
 Yawning - excessive 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Yawning involves opening the mouth involuntarily while taking a long, deep breath of air. This is most often done when you are tired or sleepy. Excessive yawning that happens more often than expected, even if  drowsiness  or  weariness  is present is considered excessive yawning. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Drowsiness or weariness Disorders associated with excessive daytime sleepiness Vasovagal reaction (stimulation of a nerve called the vagus nerve), caused by  heart attack  or  aortic dissection Brain problems such as  tumor ,  stroke ,  epilepsy ,  multiple sclerosis Certain medicines (rare) Problem with the body's temperature control (rare)  Home Care 
 
 Follow the treatment for the underlying cause. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if:  You have unexplained and excessive yawning. The yawning is associated with being very sleepy in the daytime. What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The health care provider will get your medical history and do a physical exam. You may be asked questions such as: When did the excessive yawning begin? How many times do you yawn per hour or day? Is it worse in the morning, after lunch, or during exercise? Is it worse in certain areas or certain rooms? Does yawning interfere with normal activities? Is the increased yawning related to the amount of sleep you get? Is it related to use of medicines? Is it related to activity level or boredom? Do things such as rest or breathing deeply help? What other symptoms are present?  You may need tests to look for medical problems that are causing the yawning.  Your provider will recommend treatment, if needed based on the results of your exam and tests. Alternative Names 
 
 Excessive yawning References 
 
 Chokroverty S, Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 68.  Gupta S, Mittal S. Yawning and its physiological significance.  International Journal of Applied and Basic Medical Research . 2013;3(1):11-15. PMID: 23776833  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23776833 .  Rucker JC. Cranial neuropathies. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 70.  Read More 
 
 Drowsiness 
 Fatigue 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia