
 Yaws 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Yaws is a long-term (chronic) bacterial infection that mainly affects the skin, bones, and joints. Causes 
 
 Yaws is an infection caused by a form of the  Treponema pallidum  bacteria. It is closely related to the bacterium that causes syphilis, but this form of the bacterium is not sexually transmitted. Yaws mainly affects children in rural, warm, tropical areas, such as, Africa, Western Pacific islands, and Southeast Asia. Yaws is transmitted by direct contact with the skin sores of infected people. Symptoms 
 
 About 2 to 4 weeks after infection, the person develops a sore called a "mother yaw" where bacteria entered the skin. The sore may be tan or reddish and looks like a raspberry. It is most often painless, but does cause itching.  The sores may last for months. More sores may appear shortly before or after the mother yaw heals. Scratching the sore can spread the bacteria from the mother yaw to uninfected skin. Eventually, the skin sores heal. Other symptoms include: 
Bone pain
  
Scarring of the skin
  
 Swelling of the bones and fingers
  In the advanced stage, sores on the skin and bones can lead to severe disfigurement and disability. This occurs in up to 1 in 5 people who do not get antibiotic treatment. Exams and Tests 
 
 A sample from a skin sore is examined under a special type of microscope (darkfield examination).  There is no blood test for yaws. However, the blood test for  syphilis  is often positive in people with yaws because the bacteria that cause these 2 conditions are closely related. Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves a single dose of penicillin, or 3 weekly doses for later stage disease. It is rare for the disease to return.  People who live in the same house with someone who is infected should be examined for yaws and treated if they are infected. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If treated in its early stages, yaws can be cured. Skin lesions may take several months to heal. By its late stage, yaws may have already caused damage to the skin and bones. It may not be fully reversible, even with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Yaws may damage the skin and bones. It can affect a person's appearance and ability to move. It can also cause deformities of the legs, nose, palate, and upper jaw. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: You or your child has sores on the skin or bone that don't go away.  You have stayed in tropical areas where yaws is known to occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Frambesia tropica References 
 
 Hook EW. Nonsyphilitic treponematoses. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 320. Obaro SK, Davies HD. Nonvenereal treponemal infections. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 219. Read More 
 
 Papule 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia