
 Acoustic trauma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acoustic trauma is injury to the hearing mechanisms in the inner ear. It is due to very loud noise. Causes 
 
 Acoustic trauma is a common cause of sensory  hearing loss . Damage to the hearing mechanisms within the inner ear may be caused by: Explosion near the ear Firing a gun near the ear Long-term exposure to loud noises (such as loud music or machinery)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Partial hearing loss that most often involves exposure to high-pitched sounds. The hearing loss may slowly get worse. Noises, ringing in the ear ( tinnitus ). Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will most often suspect acoustic trauma if hearing loss occurs after noise exposure.  Audiometry  may determine how much hearing has been lost. Treatment 
 
 The hearing loss may not be treatable. The goal of treatment is to protect the ear from further damage.  Eardrum repair  may be needed. A hearing aid may help you communicate. You can also learn coping skills, such as lip reading. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hearing loss may be permanent in the affected ear. Wearing ear protection when around sources of loud sounds may prevent the hearing loss from getting worse. Possible Complications 
 
 Progressive hearing loss is the main complication of acoustic trauma. Tinnitus (ear ringing) can also occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: 
   You have symptoms of acoustic trauma
    
   Hearing loss occurs or gets worse
    Prevention 
 
 Take the following steps to help prevent hearing loss: Wear protective ear plugs or earmuffs to prevent hearing damage from loud equipment. Be aware of risks to your hearing from activities such as shooting guns, using chain saws, or driving motorcycles and snowmobiles. DO NOT listen to loud music for long periods of time. Alternative Names 
 
 Injury - inner ear; Trauma - inner ear; Ear injury Images 
 
 
 Sound wave transmission 
 References 
 
 Arts HA. Sensorineural hearing loss in adults. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 150. Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. Noise-induced hearing loss. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 152. O'Handley JG, Tobin EJ, Shah AR. Otorhinolaryngology In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Hearing loss 
 
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Noise 
 Browse the Encyclopedia