
 Occupational hearing loss 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Occupational hearing loss is damage to the inner ear from noise or vibrations due to certain types of jobs. Causes 
 
 Over time, repeated exposure to loud noise and music can cause hearing loss.  Watch this video about: Hearing and the cochlea Sounds above 80 decibels (dB, a measurement of the loudness or strength of sound vibration) may cause vibrations intense enough to damage the inner ear. This is more likely to happen if the sound continues for a long time. 90 dB -- a large truck 5 yards (4.5 meters) away (motorcycles, snowmobiles, and similar engines range from 85 to 90 dB) 100 dB -- some rock concerts 120 dB -- a jackhammer about 3 feet (1 meter) away 130 dB -- a jet engine from 100 feet (30 meters) away  A general rule of thumb is that if you need to shout to be heard, the sound is in the range that can damage hearing. Some jobs carry a high risk for  hearing loss , such as: Airline ground maintenance Construction Farming Jobs involving loud music or machinery Military jobs that involve combat, aircraft noise, or other loud noise posts  In the United States, laws regulate the maximum job noise exposure that it is allowed. Both the length of exposure and decibel level are considered. If the sound is at or greater than the maximum levels recommended, you need to take steps to protect your hearing.  Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is partial or complete hearing loss. The hearing loss will likely get worse over time with continued exposure. Noise in the ear ( tinnitus ) may accompany hearing loss. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam will not show any specific changes in most cases. Tests that may be done include: Audiology/audiometry CT scan of the head MRI of the brain  Treatment 
 
 The hearing loss is very often permanent. The goals of treatment are to: Prevent further hearing loss Improve communication with any remaining hearing Develop coping skills (such as lip reading)  You may need to  learn to live with hearing loss . There are techniques you can learn to improve communication and avoid stress. Many things in your surroundings can affect how well you hear and understand what others are saying. Using a hearing aid may help you understand speech. You can also use  other devices  to help with hearing loss. Protecting your ears from any further damage and hearing loss is a key part of treatment. Protect your ears when you are exposed to loud noises. Wear ear plugs or earmuffs to protect against damage from loud equipment. Be aware of risks connected with recreation such as shooting a gun, driving snowmobiles, or other similar activities. Learn how to protect your ears when listening to music at home or concerts. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hearing loss is often permanent. The loss may get worse if you don't take measures to prevent further damage. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: 
You have hearing loss
   
The hearing loss gets worse
   
You develop other new symptoms
   Prevention 
 
 The following steps can help prevent hearing loss. Protect your ears when you are exposed to loud noises. Wear protective ear plugs or earmuffs when you are around loud equipment. Be aware of the risks to hearing from recreational activities such as shooting a gun or driving snowmobiles. DO NOT listen to loud music for long periods of time, including using headphones.  Alternative Names 
 
 Hearing loss - occupational; Noise-induced hearing loss Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 References 
 
 Arts HA. Sensorineural hearing loss in adults. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 150. Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. Noise-induced hearing loss. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 152. Noise-induced hearing loss. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. NIH Pub. No. 14-4233. Updated May 15, 2015.  www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/noise-induced-hearing-loss . Accessed June 28, 2016. Read More 
 
 Acoustic trauma 
 Hearing loss 
 
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Occupational Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia