
 Otitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Otitis is a term for infection or inflammation of the ear. Causes 
 
 Otitis can affect the inner or outer parts of the ear. The condition can be: Acute ear infection. Starts suddenly and lasts for a short period of time. It is often painful. Chronic ear infection. Occurs when the ear infection does not go away or keeps coming back. It may cause long-term damage to the ear. Based on location otitis can be:  Otitis externa  (swimmer's ear). Involves the outer ear and ear canal. A more severe form can spread into the bones and cartilage around the ear. Otitis media (ear infection). Involves the middle ear, which is located just behind the eardrum. Otitis media with effusion . Occurs when there is thick or sticky fluid behind the eardrum in the middle ear, but there is no ear infection.  Alternative Names 
 
 Ear infection; Infection - ear Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Medical findings based on ear anatomy 
 Middle ear infection (otitis media) 
 References 
 
 Chole RA. Chronic otitis media, mastoiditis, and petrositis. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 139. Klein JO. Otitis externa, otitis media, and mastoiditis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Ear infection - acute 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Malignant otitis externa 
 Otitis media with effusion 
 Swimmer's ear  
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ear tube surgery - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia