
 Waardenburg syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Waardenburg syndrome is a group of conditions passed down through families. The syndrome involves  deafness  and pale skin, hair, and eye color. Causes 
 
 Waardenburg syndrome is most often inherited as an  autosomal dominant  trait. This means only one parent has to pass on the faulty gene for a child to be affected. There are 4 main types of Waardenburg syndrome. The most common are type I and type II. Type III (Klein-Waardenburg syndrome) and type IV (Waardenburg-Shah syndrome) are rarer. The multiple types of this syndrome result from defects in different genes. Most people with this disease have a parent with the disease, but the symptoms in the parent can be quite different from those in the child. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Cleft lip (rare) Constipation Deafness (more common in type II disease) Extremely pale blue eyes or eye colors that don't match ( heterochromia ) Pale color skin, hair, and eyes (partial albinism) Difficulty completely straightening joints Possible slight decrease in intellectual function Wide-set eyes (in type I) White patch of hair or early graying of the hair  Less common types of this disease may cause problems with the arms or intestines. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: Audiometry Bowel transit time Colon biopsy Genetic testing Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment. Symptoms will be treated as needed. Special diets and medicines to keep the bowel moving are prescribed to those people who have constipation. Hearing should be checked closely. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Once hearing problems are corrected, most people with this syndrome should be able to lead a normal life. Those with rarer forms of the syndrome may have other complications. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Constipation severe enough to require part of large bowel to be removed Hearing loss Self-esteem problems, or other problems related to appearance Slight decreased intellectual functioning (possible, unusual) Slight increased risk for muscle tumor called rhabdomyosarcoma When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Genetic counseling may be helpful if you have a family history of Waardenburg syndrome and plan to have children. Call for a hearing test if you or your child has deafness or decreased hearing. Alternative Names 
 
 Klein-Waardenburg syndrome; Waardenburg-Shah syndrome Images 
 
 
 Broad nasal bridge 
 Sense of hearing 
 References 
 
 Milunsky JM. Waardenburg syndrome type I.  GeneReviews . Seattle WA: University of Washington; 2014:8. Accessed August 1, 2015. PMID: 20301703  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301703 . Read More 
 
 Albinism 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Hearing loss 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia