
 Arrhythmias 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An arrhythmia is a disorder of the  heart rate  (pulse) or heart rhythm. The heart can beat too fast (tachycardia), too slow (bradycardia), or irregularly. An arrhythmia can be harmless, a sign of other heart problems, or an immediate danger to your health. Causes 
 
 Normally, your heart works as a pump that brings blood to the lungs and the rest of the body. To help this happen, your heart has an electrical system that makes sure it contracts (squeezes) in an orderly way. The electrical impulse that signals your heart to contract begins in an area of the heart called the sinoatrial node (also called the sinus node or SA node). This is your heart's natural pacemaker. The signal leaves the SA node and travels through the heart along a set electrical pathway. Different nerve messages signal your heart to beat slower or faster.  Arrhythmias are caused by problems with the heart's electrical conduction system.  Abnormal (extra) signals may occur. Electrical signals may be blocked or slowed. Electrical signals travel in new or different pathways through the heart.  Some common causes of abnormal heartbeats are: Abnormal levels of potassium or other substances in the body Heart attack, or a damaged heart muscle from a past heart attack Heart disease that is present at birth (congenital) Heart failure or an enlarged heart Overactive thyroid gland  Watch this video about: Arrhythmias Arrhythmias may also be caused by some substances or drugs, including: Alcohol, caffeine, or stimulant drugs Heart or blood pressure medicines Cigarette smoking (nicotine) Drugs that mimic the activity of your nervous system Medicines used for depression or psychosis  Sometimes medicines used to treat one type of arrhythmia will cause another type of abnormal heart rhythm.  Some of the more common abnormal heart rhythms are: Atrial fibrillation or flutter Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) Heart block or atrioventricular block Multifocal atrial tachycardia Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia Sick sinus syndrome Ventricular fibrillation  or ventricular tachycardia Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome Symptoms 
 
 When you have an arrhythmia, your heartbeat may be: Too slow (bradycardia) Too quick (tachycardia) Irregular, uneven, or skipping beats  An arrhythmia may be present all of the time or it may come and go. You may or may not feel symptoms when the arrhythmia is present. Or, you may only notice symptoms when you are more active. Symptoms can be very mild, or they may be severe or even life threatening. Common symptoms that may occur when the arrhythmia is present include: Chest pain Fainting Lightheadedness ,  dizziness Paleness Palpitations (feeling your heart beat fast or irregularly) Shortness of breath Sweating  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen to your heart with a stethoscope and feel your pulse. Your blood pressure may be low or normal. An  ECG  will be the first test done.  Heart monitoring devices are often used to identify the rhythm problem, such as a:  Holter monitor  (where you wear a device that records and stores your heart rhythm for 24 hours) Event monitor or loop recorder (worn for 2 weeks or longer, where you record your heart rhythm when you feel an abnormal rhythm)  An  echocardiogram  is often ordered to examine the size or structure of your heart. Coronary angiography  to see how blood flows through the arteries in your heart. A special test, called an  electrophysiology study  (EPS), is done to take a closer look at the heart's electrical system. Treatment 
 
 When an arrhythmia is serious, you may need urgent treatment to restore a normal rhythm. This may include: Electrical "shock" therapy (defibrillation or cardioversion) Implanting a short-term heart pacemaker Medicines given through a vein or by mouth  Sometimes, better treatment for your angina or heart failure will lower your chance of having an arrhythmia. Medicines called anti-arrhythmic drugs may be used:  To prevent an arrhythmia from happening again To keep your heart rate from becoming too fast or too slow  Some of these medicines can have side effects. Take them as prescribed by your provider. DO NOT stop taking the medicine or change the dose without first talking to your provider. Other treatments to prevent or treat abnormal heart rhythms include: Cardiac ablation , used to destroy areas in your heart that may be causing your heart rhythm problems An  implantable cardiac defibrillator , placed in people who are at high risk of sudden cardiac death Permanent  pacemaker , a device that senses when your heart is beating irregularly, too slowly, or too fast. It sends a signal to your heart that makes your heart beat at the correct pace.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on several factors: The kind of arrhythmia you have. (Some abnormal heart rhythms may be life threatening if not treated right away, or DO NOT respond well to treatment.) Whether you have  coronary artery disease ,  heart failure , or valvular heart disease. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop any of the symptoms of a possible arrhythmia. You have been diagnosed with an arrhythmia and your symptoms worsen or DO NOT improve with treatment. Prevention 
 
 Taking steps to  prevent coronary artery disease  may reduce your chance of developing an arrhythmia. Alternative Names 
 
 Abnormal heart rhythms; Bradycardia; Tachycardia; Fibrillation Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Normal heart rhythm 
 Bradycardia 
 Ventricular tachycardia 
 Atrioventricular block,  ECG tracing 
 Conduction system of the heart 
 References 
 
 Olgin JE. Approach to the patient with suspected arrhythmia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 62. Rubart M, Zipes DP. Genesis of cardiac arrhythmias, electrophysiologic considerations. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 33. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(14):1297-1313. PMID: 22975230  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22975230 .  Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Atrial myxoma 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Heart pacemaker 
 Pulse 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Atrial fibrillation - discharge  
 Heart pacemaker - discharge 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arrhythmia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia