
 Cardiogenic shock 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cardiogenic shock is when the heart has been damaged so much that it is unable to supply enough blood to the organs of the body. Causes 
 
 The most common causes are serious heart conditions. Many of these occur during or after a  heart attack  (myocardial infarction). These complications include: A large section of heart muscle that no longer moves well or does not move at all Breaking open (rupture) of the heart muscle due to damage from the heart attack Dangerous heart rhythms, such as  ventricular tachycardia ,  ventricular fibrillation , or  supraventricular tachycardia Pressure on the heart due to a buildup of fluid around it (pericardial tamponade) Tear or rupture of the muscles or tendons that support the heart valves, especially the mitral valve Tear or rupture of the wall (septum) between the left and right ventricles (lower heart chambers) Very slow heart rhythm (bradycardia) or problem with the electrical system of the heart (heart block)  Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart is unable to pump as much blood as the body needs. It can happen even if there hasn't been a heart attack if 1 of these problems occurs and your heart function drops suddenly. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Chest pain or pressure Coma Decreased urination Fast breathing Fast pulse Heavy sweating , moist skin  Lightheadedness Loss of alertness and ability to concentrate 
   Restlessness,  agitation ,  confusion Shortness of breath Skin that feels cool to the touch Pale skin color or blotchy skin Weak (thready) pulse Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam will show: Low blood pressure (most often less than 90 systolic) Blood pressure that drops more than 10 points when you stand up after lying down (orthostatic hypotension) Weak (thready) pulse  To diagnose cardiogenic shock, a catheter (tube) may be placed in the lung artery ( right heart catheterization ). Tests may show that blood is backing up into the lungs and the heart is not pumping well. Tests include: Cardiac catheterization Chest x-ray Coronary angiography Echocardiogram Electrocardiogram Nuclear scan of the heart  Other studies may be done to find out why the heart is not working properly. Lab tests include: Arterial blood gas Blood chemistry  ( chem-7 ,  chem-20 ,  electrolytes ) Cardiac enzymes (troponin, CKMB) Complete blood count ( CBC ) Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)  Treatment 
 
 Cardiogenic shock is a medical emergency. You will need to stay in the hospital, most often in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The goal of treatment is to find and treat the cause of shock to save your life. You may need medicines to increase blood pressure and improve heart function, including: Dobutamine Dopamine Epinephrine Levosimendan Milrinone Norepinephrine  These medicines may help in the short-term. They are not often used for a long time. When a heart rhythm disturbance (dysrhythmia) is serious, urgent treatment may be needed to restore a normal heart rhythm. This may include: Electrical "shock" therapy (defibrillation or cardioversion) Implanting a temporary pacemaker Medicines given through a vein (IV)  You may also receive: Pain medicine Oxygen Fluids, blood, and blood products through a vein (IV)  Other treatments for shock may include: Cardiac catheterization  with  coronary angioplasty and stenting Heart monitoring to guide treatment Heart surgery ( coronary artery bypass surgery ,  heart valve replacement , left  ventricular assist device ) Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (IABP) to help the heart work better Pacemaker Ventricular assist device or other mechanical support  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In the past, the death rate from cardiogenic shock ranged from 80% to 90%. In more recent studies, this rate has decreased to 50% to 75%. When cardiogenic shock is not treated, the outlook is poor. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain damage Kidney damage Liver damage When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of cardiogenic shock. Cardiogenic shock is a medical emergency. Prevention 
 
 You may reduce the risk of developing cardiogenic shock by: Quickly treating its cause (such as heart attack or heart valve problem) Preventing and treating the risk factors for heart disease, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and triglycerides, or tobacco use Alternative Names 
 
 Shock - cardiogenic Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 References 
 
 Felker GM, Teerlink JR. Diagnosis and management of acute heart failure. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 24. Hollenberg S. Cardiogenic shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 107. Read More 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Muscle cramps 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 First Aid 
 Heart Attack 
 Shock 
 Browse the Encyclopedia