
 Heart failure - overview 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Heart failure is a condition in which the heart is no longer able to pump oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body efficiently. This causes symptoms to occur throughout the body. Causes 
 
 Heart failure is most often a long-term (chronic) condition, but it may come on suddenly. It can be caused by many different heart problems. The condition may affect only the right side or only the left side of the heart. More often, both sides of the heart are involved.  Heart failure is present when: Your heart muscle cannot pump (eject) the blood out of the heart very well. This is called systolic heart failure. Your heart muscle is stiff and does not fill up with blood easily. This is called diastolic heart failure. As the heart's pumping becomes less effective, blood may back up in other areas of the body. Fluid may build up in the lungs, liver, gastrointestinal tract, and the arms and legs. This is called congestive heart failure. The most common causes of heart failure are: Coronary artery disease (CAD), a narrowing of the small blood vessels that supply blood and oxygen to the heart. This can weaken the heart muscle over time or suddenly. High blood pressure that is not well controlled, leading to problems with stiffness, or eventually leading to muscle weakening.  Other heart problems that may cause heart failure are: Congenital heart disease Heart attack Heart valves that are leaky or narrowed Infection that weakens the heart muscle Some types of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias)  Other diseases that can cause or contribute to heart failure: Amyloidosis Emphysema Overactive thyroid Sarcoidosis Severe anemia Too much iron in the body Underactive thyroid  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of heart failure often begin slowly. At first, they may only occur when you are very active. Over time, you may notice breathing problems and other symptoms even when you are resting. Symptoms may also appear suddenly after the heart is damaged from a heart attack or other problem. Common symptoms are: Cough
    Fatigue, weakness, faintness
    Loss of appetite
    Need to urinate at night
    Pulse that feels fast or irregular, or a sensation of feeling the heartbeat (palpitations)
    Shortness of breath when you are active or after you lie down
    Swollen (enlarged) liver or abdomen
    Swollen feet and ankles
    Waking up from sleep after a couple of hours due to shortness of breath
    Weight gain
    Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you for signs of heart failure: Fast or difficult breathing Leg swelling (edema) Neck veins that stick out (are distended) Sounds (crackles) from fluid buildup in your lungs, heard through a stethoscope Swelling of the liver or abdomen Uneven or fast heartbeat and abnormal heart sounds  Many  tests are used to diagnose and monitor heart failure . An  echocardiogram  (echo) is most often the best first test for people when heart failure is being evaluated. Your provider will use it to guide your treatment. Other imaging tests can look at how well your heart is able to pump blood, and how much the heart muscle is damaged. Many blood tests may also be used to: Help diagnose and monitor heart failure Identify risks for various types of heart disease Look for possible causes of heart failure, or problems that may make your heart failure worse Monitor for side effects of medicines you may be taking  Treatment 
 
 MONITORING AND SELF CARE  If you have heart failure, your provider will monitor you closely. You will have follow-up visits at least every 3 to 6 months, but sometimes much more often. You will also have tests to check your heart function. Knowing your body and the  symptoms that your heart failure is getting worse  will help you stay healthier and out of the hospital. At home, watch for changes in your heart rate, pulse, blood pressure, and weight. Weight gain, especially over a day or two, can be a sign that your body is holding on to extra fluid and your heart failure is getting worse. Talk to your provider about what you should do if your weight goes up or you develop more symptoms. Limit how much salt you eat. Your provider may also ask you to limit how much fluid you drink during the day. Other important changes to make in your lifestyle: Ask your provider how much alcohol you may drink. DO NOT smoke . Stay active. Walk or ride a stationary bicycle. Your provider can provide a safe and effective exercise plan for you. DO NOT exercise on days when your weight has gone up from fluid or you are not feeling well. Lose weight if you are overweight. Lower your cholesterol by  changing your lifestyle . Get enough rest, including after exercise, eating, or other activities. This allows your heart to rest too.  MEDICINES, SURGERY, AND DEVICES  You will need to take medicines to treat your heart failure. Medicines treat the symptoms, prevent your heart failure from getting worse, and help you live longer. It is very important that you take your medicine as your health care team directed. These medicines: Help the heart muscle pump better Keep your blood from clotting Lower your cholesterol levels Open up blood vessels or slow your heart rate so your heart does not have to work as hard Reduce damage to the heart Reduce the risk of abnormal heart rhythms Replace potassium Rid your body of excess fluid and salt (sodium)  It is very important that you take your medicine as directed. DO NOT take any other drugs or herbs without first asking your provider about them. Drugs that may make your heart failure worse include: Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) Naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn)  The following  surgeries and devices  may be recommended for some people with heart failure:  Coronary bypass surgery (CABG)  or  angioplasty  with or without stenting may help improve blood flow to the damaged or weakened heart muscle. Heart valve surgery  may be done if changes in a heart valve are causing your heart failure. A  pacemaker  can help treat slow heart rates or help both sides of your heart contract at the same time. A defibrillator sends an electrical pulse to stop life-threatening abnormal heart rhythms.  END-STAGE HEART FAILURE  Severe heart failure occurs when treatments no longer work. Certain treatments may be used when a person is waiting for a heart transplant: Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) Left or right ventricular assist device (LVAD) Total artificial heart  At a certain point, the provider will decide whether it is best to keep treating heart failure aggressively. The person, along with his or her family and doctors, may want to discuss  palliative or comfort care  at this time.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Often, you can control heart failure by taking medicine, changing your lifestyle, and treating the condition that caused it. Heart failure can suddenly get worse due to: Ischemia (lack of blood flow to the heart muscle) Eating high-salt foods Heart attack Infections or other illnesses Not taking medicines correctly New, abnormal heart rhythms  Most of the time, heart failure is a chronic illness that gets worse over time. Some people develop severe heart failure. Medicines, other treatments, and surgery no longer help at this stage.  People with heart failure may be at risk for dangerous heart rhythms. These people often receive an implanted defibrillator. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop: Increased cough or phlegm Sudden weight gain or swelling Weakness Other new or unexplained symptoms  Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if:  You faint  You have fast and  irregular heartbeat  (especially if you also have other symptoms) You feel a severe crushing chest pain Prevention 
 
 Most cases of heart failure can be prevented by living a healthy lifestyle and taking steps aimed at  reducing your risk for heart disease . 
  . 
 Alternative Names 
 
 CHF; Congestive heart failure; Left-sided heart failure; Right-sided heart failure - cor pulmonale; Cardiomyopathy - heart failure; HF Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Circulation of blood through the heart 
 Foot swelling 
 References 
 
 Forman DE, Sanderson BK, Josephson RA, Raikhelkar J, Bittner V; American College of Cardiology’s Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease Section. Heart Failure as a newly approved diagnosis for cardiac rehabilitation: challenges and opportunities.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65(24):2652-2659. PMID: 26088305  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26088305 . Goodlin SJ, Bonow RO. Care of patients with end-stage heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 31. Januzzi JL, Mann DL. Clinical assessment of heart failure. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 23. Mann DL. Management of patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 25. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  Circulation . 2013;128(16):e240-e327. PMID: 23741058  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23741058 . Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Atrial myxoma 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Heartburn 
 Heart pacemaker 
 High blood pressure 
 Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Stable angina 
 Ventricular assist device 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 ACE inhibitors 
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Being active when you have heart disease 
 Heart bypass surgery - discharge 
 Heart failure - discharge 
 Heart failure - fluids and diuretics 
 Heart failure - home monitoring 
 Heart failure - what to ask your doctor  
 Heart pacemaker - discharge 
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator - discharge 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia