
 Myocarditis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle. The condition is called  pediatric myocarditis  when it occurs in children. Causes 
 
 Myocarditis is an uncommon disorder. Most of the time, it is caused by an infection that reaches the heart.  When you have an infection, your immune system produces special cells to fight off disease. If the infection affects your heart, the disease-fighting cells enter the heart. However, the chemicals made by these cells can also damage the heart muscle. As a result, the heart can become thick, swollen, and weak. Many cases are caused by a virus that reaches the heart. These can include the influenza (flu) virus, coxsackievirus, parovirus,  cytomegalovirus , adenovirus, and others.  It may also be caused by bacterial infections such as Lyme disease, streptococcus, mycoplasma, and  chlamydia . Other causes of myocarditis include: Reactions to certain medicines, such as certain chemotherapy drugs Exposure to chemicals in the environment, such as heavy metals Infections due to fungus or parasites Radiation Autoimmune disorders that cause inflammation throughout the body  Sometimes the exact cause may not be discovered.  Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms. Symptoms may be similar to the flu. If symptoms occur, they may include: Chest pain that may resemble a  heart attack Fatigue or listlessness Fever  and other signs of infection including headache, muscle aches, sore throat, diarrhea, or rashes Joint pain  or swelling Leg swelling Pale, cool hands and feet (a sign of poor circulation) Rapid breathing Rapid heart rate  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Fainting , often related to irregular heart rhythms Low urine output Exams and Tests 
 
 Myocarditis can be hard to diagnose because the signs and symptoms often mimic those of other heart and lung diseases, or a bad case of the flu. The health care provider may hear a  rapid heartbeat  or abnormal heart sounds while listening to the child's chest with a stethoscope. A physical exam may detect fluid in the lungs and swelling in the legs in older children. There may be signs of infection, including fever and rashes. A  chest x-ray  can show enlargement (swelling) of the heart. If the provider suspects myocarditis based on the exam and chest x-ray, an  electrocardiogram  may also be done to help make the diagnosis. Other tests that may be needed include: Blood cultures to check for infection Blood tests to look for antibodies against viruses or the heart muscle itself Blood tests to check liver and kidney function Complete blood count Heart biopsy (the most accurate way to confirm the diagnosis, but not always needed) Special tests to check for the presence of viruses in the blood (viral PCR)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the cause of the problem, and may involve: Antibiotics to fight bacterial infection Medicines called steroids to reduce swelling  Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), a medicine made of substances (called antibodies) that the body produces to fight infection, to control the inflammatory process Diuretics to remove excess water from the body  Low-salt diet  Reduced activity  If the heart muscle is weak, your provider will prescribe medicines to treat heart failure. Abnormal heart rhythms may require the use of other medicines. You may also need a device such as a pacemaker, or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator's to correct an irregular heartbeat. If a blood clot is in the heart chamber, you will also receive blood thinning medicine. Rarely, a heart transplant may be needed if the heart muscle has become very weak or you have other health problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome can vary, depending on the cause of the problem and a person's overall health. Some people may recover completely. Others may have lasting heart failure. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cardiomyopathy Heart failure Pericarditis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of myocarditis, especially after a recent infection. Seek medical help right away if: Your symptoms are severe. You have been myocarditis, and you have increased  chest pain ,  swelling , or  breathing problems .  Prevention 
 
 Treat conditions that cause myocarditis promptly to reduce the risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Inflammation - heart muscle Images 
 
 
 Myocarditis 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Lymph tissue in the head and neck. 
 References 
 
 Cooper LT, Knowlton KU. Myocarditis. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 67. Knowlton KU, Narezkina A, Savoia MC, Oxman MN. Myocarditis and pericarditis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 86. McKenna WJ, Elliott P. Diseases of the myocardium and endocardium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Flu 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Pericarditis 
 Polio 
 Rubella 
 
 Review Date 2/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia