
 Addison disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Addison disease is a disorder that occurs when the adrenal glands do not produce enough hormones. Causes 
 
 The  adrenal glands  are small hormone-releasing organs located on top of each kidney. They are made up of an outer portion, called the cortex, and an inner portion, called the medulla. The cortex produces 3 hormones: Glucocorticoid hormones (such as cortisol) maintain sugar (glucose) control, decrease (suppress)  immune response , and help the body respond to stress. Mineralocorticoid hormones (such as aldosterone) regulate sodium and potassium balance. Sex hormones, androgens (male) and estrogens (female), affect sexual development and sex drive.  Addison disease results from damage to the adrenal cortex. The damage causes the cortex to produce hormone levels that are too low. This damage may be caused by the following: The immune system mistakenly attacking the adrenal glands (autoimmune disease) Infections such as  tuberculosis , HIV, or fungal infections Hemorrhage into the adrenal glands Tumors  Risk factors for the autoimmune type of Addison disease include other  autoimmune diseases : Swelling (inflammation) of the thyroid gland that often results in reduced thyroid function ( chronic thyroiditis )
  Thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone ( overactive thyroid )
  Itchy rash with bumps and blisters ( dermatitis herpetiformis )
  Autoimmune disorder that leads to overactivity of the thyroid gland ( Graves disease )
  Parathyroid glands in the neck do not produce enough parathyroid hormone ( hypoparathyroidism )
  Pituitary gland does not produce normal amounts of some or all of its hormones ( hypopituitarism )
  Autoimmune disorder that affects the nerves and the muscles they control ( myasthenia gravis )
  Body does not have enough healthy red blood cells ( pernicious anemia )
  Testicles cannot produce sperm or male hormones ( testicular failure ) Type I diabetes Loss of brown color (pigment) from areas of the skin ( vitiligo )
  Certain rare genetic defects may also cause adrenal insufficiency. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Addison disease include: Chronic diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting Darkening of the skin in some places Dehydration Dizziness when standing up Paleness Extreme  weakness ,  fatigue , and slow, sluggish movement Mouth lesions  on the inside of a cheek (buccal  mucosa ) Salt craving Weight loss with reduced appetite  Exams and Tests 
 
 Laboratory tests may show: Increased  potassium Low blood pressure, especially with a change in body position Low  cortisol level Low  serum sodium Low blood pH Normal sex hormone levels  High  eosinophil count  in the blood Additional laboratory tests may be ordered. Other tests may include: Abdominal x-ray Abdominal CT scan Treatment 
 
 Treatment with replacement corticosteroids will control the symptoms of this disease. These medicines usually need to be taken for life.  Never skip doses of your medicine for this condition because life-threatening reactions may occur. Your health care provider may increase your dosage for a short time because of: Infection Injury Stress Surgery  During an extreme form of adrenal insufficiency, called  adrenal crisis , you must inject hydrocortisone right away. Treatment for low blood pressure is usually needed as well. Some people with Addison disease are taught to give themselves an emergency injection of hydrocortisone during stressful situations. Always carry medical ID (card, bracelet, or necklace) that says you have adrenal insufficiency. The ID should also say the type of medicine and dosage you need in case of an emergency.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With hormone therapy, many people with Addison disease are able to lead a nearly normal life. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can occur if you take too little or too much adrenal hormone. Complications also may result from the following related illnesses: Diabetes Chronic thyroiditis 
   Hypoparathyroidism
    Ovarian hypofunction  or testicular failure
    
   Pernicious anemia Overactive thyroid When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You are unable to keep your medicine down due to vomiting. You have stress such as infection, injury, trauma, or dehydration. You may need to have your medicine adjusted. Your weight increases over time. Your ankles begin to swell. You develop new symptoms. On treatment, you develop signs of a disorder called  Cushing syndrome If you have symptoms of adrenal crisis, give yourself an emergency injection of your prescribed medicine. If it is not available, go to the nearest emergency room or call 911. Symptoms of adrenal crisis include: Abdominal pain Difficulty breathing Dizziness or lightheadedness Low blood pressure Reduced level of consciousness  Alternative Names 
 
 Adrenocortical hypofunction; Chronic adrenocortical insufficiency; Primary adrenal insufficiency Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Barthel A, Willenberg HS, Gruber M, Bornstein SR. Adrenal insufficiency. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 102. Napier C, Pearce SH. Current and emerging therapies for Addison's disease.  Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes . 2014;21(3):147-153. PMID: 24755997  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24755997 . Nieman LK. Adrenal cortex. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 227. Read More 
 
 Adrenal glands 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis 
 Diabetes 
 Graves disease 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Immune response 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Ovarian hypofunction 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Testicular failure 
 Thrush - children and adults 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Vitiligo 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Addison Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia