
 Cranial mononeuropathy III - diabetic type 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This diabetic type of cranial mononeuropathy III is a complication of  diabetes . It causes double vision and  eyelid drooping . Causes 
 
 Mononeuropathy  means that only one nerve is damaged. This disorder affects the third cranial nerve in the skull. This is one of the cranial nerves that control eye movement. This type of damage may occur along with  diabetic peripheral neuropathy . Cranial mononeuropathy III is the most common cranial nerve disorder in people with diabetes. It is due to damage to the small blood vessels that feed the nerve. Cranial mononeuropathy III  can also occur in people who don't have diabetes. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Double vision Drooping of one eyelid (ptosis) Pain in the head or behind the eye  Exams and Tests 
 
 An examination of the eyes will determine whether only the third nerve is affected or if other nerves have also been damaged. Signs may include: 
Eyes that are not aligned
   
Pupil reaction that is almost always normal
   Your health care provider will do a complete examination to determine the possible effect on other parts of the nervous system. Depending on the suspected cause, you may need: Blood tests Tests to look at blood vessels in the brain ( cerebral angiogram , CT angiogram,  MR angiogram ) MRI  or  CT scan of the brain Spinal tap ( lumbar puncture )  You may need to be referred to a doctor who specializes in vision problems related to the nerves in the eye (neuro-ophthalmologist). Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment to correct the nerve injury. Treatments to help symptoms may include: 
  Close  control of blood sugar level 
  Eye patch or glasses with prisms to reduce double vision
   
  Pain medicines
   
  Surgery to correct eyelid drooping or eyes that are not aligned
   Some people may recover without treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many people get better over 3 to 6 months. Some people have permanent eye muscle weakness. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Permanent eyelid drooping Permanent vision changes When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have double vision and it does not go away in a few minutes, especially if you also have eyelid drooping. Prevention 
 
 Controlling your blood sugar level may reduce the risk of developing this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Diabetic third nerve palsy; Pupil-sparing third cranial nerve palsy Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Brownlee M, Aiello LP, Cooper ME, Vinik AI, Plutzky J, Boulton AJM. Complications of diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. Rucker JC, Thurtell MJ. Cranial neuropathies. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 104. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Ptosis - infants and children 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetic Nerve Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia