
 Diabetes insipidus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diabetes insipidus is an uncommon condition in which the kidneys are unable to prevent the excretion of water. Causes 
 
 During the day, your kidneys filter all your blood many times. Normally, most of the water is reabsorbed, and only a small amount of concentrated urine is excreted. Diabetes insipidus (DI) occurs when the kidneys cannot concentrate the urine normally, and a large amount of dilute urine is excreted.  The amount of water excreted in the urine is controlled by antidiuretic hormone (ADH).  ADH  is also called vasopressin. ADH is produced in a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It is then stored and released from the pituitary gland. This is a small gland just below the base of the brain. DI caused by a lack of ADH is called  central diabetes insipidus . When DI is caused by a failure of the kidneys to respond to ADH, the condition is called  nephrogenic diabetes insipidus . Nephrogenic means related to the kidney. Central DI can be caused by damage to the hypothalamus or pituitary gland as a result of: Genetic  problems Head injury Infection Loss of blood supply to the pituitary gland Surgery Tumors  in or near the pituitary Nephrogenic DI involves a defect in the kidneys. As a result, the kidneys do not respond to ADH. Like central DI, nephrogenic DI is very rare. Nephrogenic DI may be caused by: Certain drugs (such as lithium) Genetic problems High level of calcium in the body ( hypercalcemia ) Kidney disease (such as  polycystic kidney disease )  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of DI include:  Excessive thirst  that may be intense or uncontrollable, usually with the need to drink large amounts of water or craving for ice water Excessive urine volume Excessive urination, often needing to urinate every hour throughout the day and night  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood sodium  and  osmolarity Desmopressin (DDAVP) challenge MRI of the head Urinalysis Urine concentration  and  osmolarity Urine output  Treatment 
 
 The cause of the underlying condition will be treated when possible. Central DI may be controlled with vasopressin (desmopressin, DDAVP). You take vasopressin as an injection, a nasal spray, or tablets. If nephrogenic DI is caused by medicine, stopping the medicine may help restore normal kidney function. But after many years of use of some medicines, such as lithium, nephrogenic DI can be permanent. Hereditary nephrogenic DI and lithium-induced nephrogenic DI are treated by drinking enough fluids to match urine output. Medicines that lower urine output also need to be taken.  Nephrogenic DI is treated with anti-inflammatory medicines and diuretics (water pills). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on the underlying disorder. If treated, DI does not cause severe problems or result in early death. Possible Complications 
 
 If your body's thirst control is normal and you are able to drink enough fluids, there are no significant effects on body fluid or salt balance. Not drinking enough fluids can lead to  dehydration  and  electrolyte  imbalance, which can be very dangerous. If DI is treated with vasopressin and your body's thirst control is not normal, drinking more fluids than your body needs can also cause dangerous electrolyte imbalance.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of DI. If you have DI, contact your provider if frequent urination or extreme thirst returns. Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Bichet DG. Polyuria and diabetes insipidus. In: Alpern RJ, Caplan M, Moe OW, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 46. Carr AC. Diabetes insipidus and other polyuric syndromes. In: Berstein AD, Soni N, eds.  Oh's Intensive Care Manual . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Antidiuretic hormone blood test 
 Dehydration 
 Electrolytes 
 Fatigue 
 Muscle aches 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Sodium blood test 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes Insipidus 
 Browse the Encyclopedia