
 Factitious hyperthyroidism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Factitious hyperthyroidism is higher-than-normal thyroid hormone levels in the blood that occur from taking too much thyroid hormone medicine. Causes 
 
 The thyroid gland produces the hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). In most cases of  hyperthyroidism , the thyroid gland itself produces too much of these hormones. Hyperthyroidism can also be caused by taking too much thyroid hormone medicine for  hypothyroidism . This is called factitious hyperthyroidism. When this occurs because the prescribed dosage of hormone medicine is too high, it is called iatrogenic, or doctor-induced, hyperthyroidism. Factitious hyperthyroidism can also occur when someone takes too much thyroid hormone on purpose. These may be people: 
   Who have mental disorders such as  Munchausen syndrome 
   Who are trying to lose weight
    
   Who want to get money from the insurance company
    Children may take thyroid hormone pills accidentally. In rare cases, factitious hyperthyroidism is caused by eating meat that has thyroid gland tissue in it. Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms of factitious hyperthyroidism are the same as those of hyperthyroidism caused by a thyroid gland disorder, except that: There is no  goiter . The thyroid gland is often small. The eyes do not bulge, as they do in  Graves disease  (the most common type of hyperthyroidism). The skin over the shins does not thicken, as it sometimes does in people who have Graves disease. Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests used to diagnose factitious hyperthyroidism include: Free T4 Radioactive iodine uptake Thyroglobulin Total  T3 Total  T4 TSH Treatment 
 
 Your health care provider will tell you to stop taking thyroid hormone. If you need to take it, your provider will reduce the dosage. You should be re-checked in 2 to 4 weeks to be sure that the signs and symptoms are gone. This also helps to confirm the diagnosis. People with Munchausen syndrome will need mental health treatment and follow-up. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Factitious hyperthyroidism will clear up on its own when you stop taking or lower the dosage of thyroid hormone. Possible Complications 
 
 When factitious hyperthyroidism lasts a long time, the same complications as untreated or improperly treated hyperthyroidism may develop: 
   Abnormal heartbeat ( atrial fibrillation ) Chest pain  ( angina ) Heart attack Loss of bone mass (if severe,  osteoporosis ) Weight loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Prevention 
 
 Thyroid hormone should be taken only by prescription and under the supervision of a provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Factitious thyrotoxicosis; Thyrotoxicosis factitia; Thyrotoxicosis medicamentosa Images 
 
 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Kopp P. Autonomously functioning thyroid nodules and other causes of thyrotoxicosis. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Chest pain 
 Heart attack 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia