
 Gestational diabetes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gestational diabetes is high blood sugar ( diabetes ) that starts or is first diagnosed during pregnancy. Causes 
 
 Pregnancy hormones can block insulin from doing its job. When this happens, glucose level may increase in a pregnant woman's blood. You are at greater risk for gestational diabetes if you: Are older than 25 when you are pregnant Come from a higher risk ethnic group, such as Hispanic American, African American, Native American, Southeast Asian, or Pacific Islander Have a family history of diabetes Gave birth to a baby that weighed more than 9 pounds (4 kg) or had a birth defect Have  high blood pressure Have too much amniotic fluid Have had an unexplained miscarriage or stillbirth Were overweight before your pregnancy Gain too much weight during your pregnancy Have polycystic ovarian syndrome  Symptoms 
 
 Most of the time there are no symptoms. The diagnosis is made during a routine prenatal screening. Mild symptoms, such as increased thirst or shakiness, may be present. These symptoms are usually not life threatening to the pregnant woman. Other symptoms may include: Blurred vision Fatigue Frequent infections, including those of the bladder, vagina, and skin Increased thirst Increased urination Exams and Tests 
 
 Gestational diabetes most often starts halfway through the pregnancy. All pregnant women should receive an  oral glucose tolerance test  between the 24th and 28th week of pregnancy to look for the condition. Women who have risk factors for gestational diabetes may have this test earlier in the pregnancy. Once you are diagnosed with gestational diabetes, you can see how well you are doing by testing your glucose level at home. The most common way involves pricking your finger and putting a drop of your blood on a machine that will give you a glucose reading. Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to keep blood sugar (glucose) level within normal limits during the pregnancy, and to make sure that the growing baby is healthy. WATCHING YOUR BABY Your health care provider should closely check both you and your baby throughout the pregnancy. Fetal monitoring will check the size and health of the fetus. A  nonstress test  is a very simple, painless test for you and your baby.  A machine that hears and displays your baby's heartbeat (electronic fetal monitor) is placed on your abdomen. Your provider can compare the pattern of your baby's heartbeat to movements and find out whether the baby is doing well. DIET AND EXERCISE The best way to improve your diet is by eating a variety of healthy foods. You should learn how to read food labels, and check them when making food decisions. Talk to your provider if you are a vegetarian or on another special diet. In general,  when you have gestational diabetes  your diet should:  Be moderate in fat and protein Provide your carbohydrates through foods that include fruits, vegetables, and complex carbohydrates (such as bread, cereal, pasta, and rice) Be low in foods that contain a lot of sugar, such as soft drinks, fruit juices, and pastries  If managing your diet does not control blood sugar (glucose) level, you may be prescribed diabetes medicine by mouth or insulin therapy.  Most women who develop gestational diabetes will not need diabetes medicines or insulin, but some will. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 There are many risks of having diabetes in pregnancy when blood sugar is not well controlled. With good control, most pregnancies have good outcomes. Pregnant women with gestational diabetes tend to have larger babies at birth. This can increase the chance of problems at the time of delivery, including: Birth injury (trauma) because of the baby's large size Delivery by  C-section Your baby is more likely to have periods of low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) during the first few days of life. Mothers with gestational diabetes have an increased risk for  high blood pressure during pregnancy . After delivery: Your high blood sugar (glucose) level often goes back to normal. You should be closely followed for signs of diabetes over the next 5 to 10 years after delivery. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you are pregnant and you have symptoms of  diabetes . Prevention 
 
 Getting prenatal care early and having regular checkups helps improve your health and the health of your baby. Having prenatal screening at 24 to 28 weeks of pregnancy will help detect gestational diabetes early. If you are overweight, getting your weight within the normal  body mass index  (BMI) range will decrease your risk of gestational diabetes. Alternative Names 
 
 Glucose intolerance during pregnancy Images 
 
 
 Pancreas 
 Gestational diabetes 
 References 
 
 American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2016.  Diabetes Care . 2016;39(suppl 1):S1-S106. Landon MB, Catalano PM, Gabbe SG. Diabetes mellitus complicating pregnancy. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2017:chap 40. Metzger BE. Diabetes mellitus and pregnancy. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 45. Moyer VA. Screening for gestational diabetes mellitus: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2014;160:414-420. PMID: 24424622  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24424622 . Read More 
 
 Blood sugar test - blood 
 Carbohydrates 
 Low blood sugar 
 Overweight 
 
 Review Date 5/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes and Pregnancy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia