
 Gigantism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gigantism is abnormal growth due to an excess of  growth hormone  during childhood. Causes 
 
 The most common cause of too much growth hormone release is a noncancerous (benign)  tumor  of the pituitary gland. Other causes include: Genetic disease that affects the skin color (pigmentation) and causes benign tumors of the skin, heart, and endocrine (hormone) system (Carney complex) Genetic disease that affects the bones and skin pigmentation ( McCune-Albright syndrome ) Genetic disease in which one or more of the endocrine glands are overactive or form a tumor ( Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 ) Disease in which tumors form on the nerves of the brain and spine (neurofibromatosis)  If excess growth hormone occurs after normal bone growth has stopped, the condition is known as  acromegaly . Gigantism is very rare. Symptoms 
 
 The child will grow in height, as well as in the muscles and organs. This excessive growth makes the child extremely large for his or her age. Other symptoms include: Delayed puberty Double vision or difficulty with side (peripheral) vision Very prominent forehead ( frontal bossing ) and a prominent jaw Gaps between the teeth Headache Increased sweating Irregular periods (menstruation) Large hands and feet with thick fingers and toes Release of breast milk Sleep problems Thickening of the facial features Weakness Voice changes  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about the child's symptoms. Laboratory tests that may be ordered include: Cortisol Estradiol  (girls) Growth hormone suppression test Prolactin Insulin-like growth factor-I Testosterone  (boys) Thyroid hormone  Imaging tests, such as  CT  or  MRI  scan of the head, also may be ordered to check for a  pituitary tumor .  Treatment 
 
 For pituitary tumors that have clear outlines, surgery can cure many cases. When surgery cannot completely remove the tumor, medicines are used to block or reduce growth hormone release or prevent growth hormone from reaching target tissues. Sometimes radiation treatment is used to decrease the size of the tumor after surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pituitary surgery is usually successful in limiting  growth hormone  production. Early treatment can reverse many of the changes caused by growth hormone excess. Possible Complications 
 
 Surgery may lead to low levels of other pituitary hormones, which can cause any of the following conditions: Adrenal insufficiency (adrenal glands do not produce enough of their hormones) Diabetes insipidus  (extreme thirst and excessive urination; in rare cases) Hypogonadism  (body's sex glands produce little or no hormones) Hypothyroidism  (thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has signs of excessive growth. Alternative Names 
 
 Gigantism; Pituitary giant; Overproduction of growth hormone; Growth hormone - excess production Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Katznelson L, Laws ER Jr, Melmed S, et al. Acromegaly: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2014;99:3933-51. PMID: 25356808  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25356808 . Melmed S. Acromegaly. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 Growth hormone test 
 Long bones 
 McCune-Albright syndrome 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Growth Disorders 
 Pituitary Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia