
 Hypothyroidism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypothyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone. This condition is often called underactive thyroid. Causes 
 
 The thyroid gland is an important organ of the  endocrine system . It is located at the front of the neck, just above where your collarbones meet. The thyroid makes hormones that control the way every cell in the body uses energy. This process is called  metabolism . Hypothyroidism is more common in women and people over age 50. The most common cause of hypothyroidism is thyroiditis. Swelling and inflammation damage the thyroid gland's cells.  Causes of this problem include:  The immune system attacking the thyroid gland Viral infections (common cold) or other respiratory infections Pregnancy (often called postpartum thyroiditis)  Other causes of hypothyroidism include: Certain medicines, such as lithium and amiodarone Congenital (birth) defects Radiation treatments to the neck or brain to treat different cancers Radioactive iodine used to treat an overactive thyroid gland Surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid gland Sheehan syndrome , a condition that may occur in a woman who bleeds severely during pregnancy or childbirth and causes the destruction of the pituitary gland Pituitary tumor  or pituitary surgery  Symptoms 
 
 Early symptoms: Hard stools or constipation Increased sensitivity to cold temperature Fatigue or feeling slowed down Heavier and irregular menstrual periods Joint or muscle pain Paleness or dry skin Sadness or depression Thin, brittle hair or fingernails Weakness Weight gain Late symptoms, if untreated: Decreased taste and smell Hoarseness Puffy face, hands, and feet Slow speech Thickening of the skin Thinning of eyebrows Low body temperature Slow heart rate  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a  physical exam  and may find that your thyroid gland is enlarged. Sometimes, the gland is normal size or smaller-than-normal. The exam may also reveal: Thin brittle hair Coarse features of the face Pale or dry skin, which may be cool to the touch Reflexes that are abnormal Swelling of the arms and legs  Blood tests are also ordered to measure your thyroid hormones  TSH  and  T4 . You may also have tests to check: Cholesterol levels Complete blood count ( CBC ) Liver enzymes Prolactin Sodium Cortisol Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at replacing the thyroid hormone you are lacking.  Levothyroxine is the most commonly used medicine:  You will be prescribed the lowest dose possible that relieves your symptoms and brings your blood hormone levels back to normal. If you have heart disease or you are older, your doctor may start you on a very small dose. Most people with an underactive thyroid will need to take this medicine for life.  When starting you on your medicine, your doctor may check your hormone levels every 2 to 3 months. After that, your thyroid hormone levels should be monitored at least once every year. When you are taking thyroid medicine, be aware of the following: DO NOT stop taking the medicine even when you feel better. Continue taking it exactly as your doctor prescribed. If you change brands of thyroid medicine, let your doctor know. Your levels may need to be checked. What you eat can change the way your body absorbs thyroid medicine. Talk with your doctor if you are eating a lot of soy products or are on a high-fiber diet. Thyroid medicine works best on an empty stomach and when taken 1 hour before any other medicines. Ask your doctor if you should take your medicine at bedtime. Taking it at bedtime may allow your body to absorb the medicine better than taking it in the daytime. Wait at least 4 hours after taking thyroid hormone before you take fiber supplements, calcium, iron, multivitamins, aluminum hydroxide antacids, colestipol, or medicines that bind bile acids.  While you are taking thyroid replacement therapy, tell your doctor if you have any symptoms that suggest your dose is too high, such as: Palpitations Rapid weight loss Restlessness or shakiness Sweating  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, thyroid hormone level becomes normal with proper treatment. You will likely take a thyroid hormone medicine for the rest of your life. Possible Complications 
 
 Myxedema coma, the most severe form of hypothyroidism, is rare. It occurs when thyroid hormone levels get very low. It can be caused by an infection, illness, exposure to cold, or certain medicines in people with untreated hypothyroidism. Myxedema coma is a medical emergency that must be treated in the hospital. Some people may need oxygen, breathing assistance (ventilator), fluid replacement, and intensive-care nursing.  Symptoms and signs of myxedema coma include: Below normal temperature Decreased breathing Low blood pressure Low blood sugar Unresponsiveness Inappropriate or uncharacteristic moods  People with untreated hypothyroidism are at increased risk of: Infection Infertility ,  miscarriage , giving birth to a baby with birth defects Heart disease because of higher levels of LDL (bad) cholesterol Heart failure  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of hypothyroidism. If you are being treated for hypothyroidism, call your doctor if: You develop  chest pain  or rapid heartbeat You have an infection Your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment You develop new symptoms  Alternative Names 
 
 Myxedema; Adult hypothyroidism; Underactive thyroid; Goiter - hypothyroidism; Thyroiditis - hypothyroidism; Thyroid hormone - hypothyroidism Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Brain-thyroid link 
 Primary and secondary hypothyroidism 
 References 
 
 Brent GA, Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism and thyroiditis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 13 Ferri FF. Hypothyroidism. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2017 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:662. Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for hypothyroidism in adults: cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association.  Endocr Pract . 2012;18(6):988-1028. PMID: 23246686  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23246686 . Read More 
 
 Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy 
 Free T4 test 
 Hypothalamus 
 Infertility 
 Iontophoresis 
 Low blood sugar 
 Metabolism 
 Miscarriage 
 Overweight 
 T3 test 
 X-ray 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Thyroid gland removal - discharge 
 Review Date 4/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia