
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type I is a disease in which one or more of the endocrine glands are overactive or forms a tumor. It is passed down through families. Endocrine glands most commonly involved include: 
  Pancreas
   
  Parathyroid
   
  Pituitary
   Causes 
 
 MEN I is caused by a defect in a gene that carries the code for a protein called menin. The condition causes tumors of various glands to appear in the same person, but not necessarily at the same time. The disorder may occur at any age, and it affects men and women equally. A family history of this disorder raises your risk. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary from person to person, and depend on which gland is involved. They may include: Abdominal pain Anxiety Black, tarry stools Bloated feeling after meals Burning, aching, or  hunger  discomfort in the upper abdomen or lower chest that is relieved by antacids, milk, or food Decreased sexual interest Fatigue Headache Lack of menstrual periods (in women) Loss of appetite Loss of body or facial hair (in men) Mental changes  or confusion Muscle pain Nausea and vomiting Sensitivity to the cold Unintentional weight loss Vision problems Weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms. The following tests may be done: Blood cortisol level CT scan of the abdomen CT scan of the head Fasting blood sugar Genetic testing Insulin test MRI of the abdomen MRI of the head Parathyroid biopsy Serum adrenocorticotropic hormone Serum calcium Serum follicle stimulating hormone Serum gastrin Serum glucagon Serum luteinizing hormone Serum parathyroid hormone Serum prolactin Serum thyroid stimulating hormone Ultrasound of the neck  Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the diseased gland is often the treatment of choice. A medicine called bromocriptine may be used instead of surgery for pituitary tumors that release the hormone prolactin. The parathyroid glands, which control calcium production, can be removed. However, it is difficult for the body to regulate calcium levels without these glands, so a total parathyroid removal is not done first in most cases.  Medicine is available to decrease the excess stomach acid production caused by some tumors (gastrinomas), and to reduce the risk of ulcers. Hormone replacement therapy is given when entire glands are removed or do not produce enough hormones. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pituitary and parathyroid tumors are usually noncancerous ( benign ), but some pancreatic tumors may become cancerous (malignant) and spread to the liver. These can lower life expectancy. The symptoms of  peptic ulcer  disease, low blood sugar, excess calcium in the blood, and pituitary dysfunction usually respond well to appropriate treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 The tumors can keep coming back. Symptoms and complications depend on which glands are involved. Regular check-ups by your health care provider are essential. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice symptoms of MEN I or have a family history of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Screening close relatives of people affected with this disorder is recommended. Alternative Names 
 
 Wermer syndrome; MEN I Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Clinical practice guidelines in oncology: neuroendocrine tumors. National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2014. Updated May 25, 2016. Version 1.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/neuroendocrine.pdf . Accessed April 6, 2016. Nieman LK, Spiegel AM. Polyglandular disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 231. Thakker RV. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 148. Read More 
 
 Kidney stones 
 Low blood sugar 
 Parathyroid cancer 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endocrine Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia