
 Sheehan syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sheehan syndrome is a condition that can occur in a woman who bleeds severely during childbirth. Sheehan syndrome is a type of  hypopituitarism . Causes 
 
 Severe bleeding during childbirth can cause tissue in the pituitary gland to die. This gland does not work properly as a result. The pituitary gland is at the base of the brain. It makes hormones that stimulate growth, production of breast milk, reproductive functions, the thyroid, and the adrenal glands. A lack of these hormones can lead to a variety of symptoms. Conditions that increase the risk of bleeding during childbirth and Sheehan syndrome include multiple pregnancy (twins or triplets) and problems with the placenta. The placenta is the organ that develops during pregnancy to feed the fetus. It is rare condition. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Sheehan syndrome may include: Inability to breast-feed (breast milk never "comes in") Fatigue Lack of menstrual bleeding Loss of pubic and axillary hair Low blood pressure Note: Other than not being able to breast feed, symptoms may not develop for several years after the delivery. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests done may include: Blood tests to measure hormone levels MRI of the head  to rule out other pituitary problems, such as a tumor Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves estrogen and progesterone hormone replacement therapy. These hormones must be taken at least until the normal age of menopause. Thyroid and adrenal hormones must also be taken. These will be needed for the rest of your life. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook with early diagnosis and treatment is excellent. Possible Complications 
 
 This condition can be life threatening if not treated. Prevention 
 
 Severe loss of blood during childbirth can often be prevented by proper medical care. Otherwise, Sheehan syndrome is not preventable. Alternative Names 
 
 Postpartum hypopituitarism; Postpartum pituitary insufficiency; Hypopituitarism syndrome Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Burton GJ, Sibley CP, Jauniaux ERM. Placental anatomy and physiology. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 1. Kaiser U, Ho KKY. Pitutary physiology and diagnostic evaluation. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 8. Molitch ME. Pitutary and adrenal disorders in pregnancy. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 43. Nader S. Other endocrine disorders of pregnancy. In: Creasy RK, Resnik R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ, Moore TR, Greene MF, eds.  Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 61. Read More 
 
 Hypopituitarism 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda Center for Fertility, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Childbirth Problems 
 Pituitary Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia