
 Abdominal bloating 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Abdominal bloating is a condition in which the belly (abdomen) feels full and tight. Your belly may look swollen (distended). Causes 
 
 Common causes include: Swallowing air Constipation Gastroesophageal reflux  (GERD) Irritable bowel syndrome Lactose intolerance  and problems digesting other foods Overeating Small bowel bacterial overgrowth Weight gain  You may have bloating if you take the oral diabetes medicine acarbose. Some other medicines or foods containing lactulose or sorbitol, may cause bloating. More serious disorders that may cause bloating are: Ascites  and tumors Celiac disease Dumping syndrome Ovarian cancer Problems with the pancreas not producing enough digestive enzymes (pancreatic insufficiency)  Home Care 
 
 You may take the following steps: Avoid chewing gum or carbonated drinks. Stay away from foods with high levels of fructose or sorbitol. Avoid foods that can produce gas, such as Brussels sprouts, turnips, cabbage, beans, and lentils. Do not eat too quickly. Stop smoking.  Get treatment for constipation if you have it. However, fiber supplements such as psyllium or 100% bran can make your symptoms worse. You may try simethicone and other medicines you buy at the drugstore to help with gas. Charcoal caps can also help. Watch for foods that trigger your bloating so you can start to avoid those foods. These may include:  Milk and other dairy products that contain  lactose Certain carbohydrates that contain fructose, known as FODMAPs  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Abdominal pain Blood in the stools or dark, tarry looking stools Diarrhea Heartburn that is getting worse Vomiting Weight loss Alternative Names 
 
 Bloating; Meteorism Images 
 
 
 Abdominal ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Azpiroz F. Intestinal gas. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 17. McQuaid KR. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gas 
 Browse the Encyclopedia