
 Abdominal exploration 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Abdominal exploration is surgery to look at the organs and structures in your belly area (abdomen). This includes your: Appendix Bladder Gallbladder Intestines Kidney and ureters Liver Pancreas Spleen Stomach Uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries (in women) Surgery that opens the abdomen is called a laparotomy.  Description 
 
 Exploratory laparotomy is done while you are under general anesthesia. This means you are asleep and feel no pain.  The surgeon makes a cut into the abdomen and examines the abdominal organs. The size and location of the surgical cut depends on the specific health concern. A  biopsy  can be taken during the procedure. Laparoscopy describes a group of procedures that are performed with a tiny camera placed inside the abdomen. If possible, laparoscopy will be done instead of laparotomy. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may recommend a laparatomy if imaging tests of the abdomen, such as  x-rays  and  CT scans , have not provided an accurate diagnosis. Exploratory laparotomy may be used to help diagnose and treat many health conditions, including: Cancer  of the ovary, colon, pancreas, liver Endometriosis Gallstones Hole in the intestine (intestinal perforation) Inflammation of the appendix ( acute appendicitis ) Inflammation of an intestinal pocket ( diverticulitis ) Inflammation of the pancreas ( acute  or  chronic pancreatitis ) Liver abscess Pockets of infection (retroperitoneal abscess,  abdominal abscess , pelvic abscess) Pregnancy outside of the uterus ( ectopic pregnancy ) Scar tissue in the abdomen ( adhesions )  Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general include: Reactions to medicines, breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots, infection Risks of this surgery include: Incisional  hernia Damage to organs in the abdomen Before the Procedure 
 
 You will visit with your health care provider and undergo medical tests before your surgery. Your provider will: Do a complete physical exam. Make sure other medical conditions you may have, such as diabetes,  high blood pressure , or heart or lung problems are under control. Perform tests to make sure that you will be able to tolerate the surgery. If you are a smoker, you should stop smoking several weeks before your surgery. Ask your provider for help.  Tell your provider: What medicines, vitamins, herbs, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription. If you have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day If you might be pregnant  During the week before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot. Some of these are aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix), or ticlopidine (Ticlid). Ask your doctor which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Prepare your home for your return from the hospital.  On the day of your surgery: Follow your provider's instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take medicines your provider told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You should be able to start eating and drinking normally about 2 to 3 days after the surgery. How long you stay in the hospital depends on the severity of the problem. Complete recovery usually takes about 4 weeks. Alternative Names 
 
 Exploratory surgery; Laparotomy; Exploratory laparotomy Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Pelvic adhesions 
 Abdominal exploration  - series 
 References 
 
 D'Souza RE, Novell R. Laparotomy: elective and emergency. In: Novell R, Baker DM, Goddard N, eds.  Kirk's General Surgical Operations . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 4. Squires RA, Postier RG. Acute abdomen. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 47. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Adhesion 
 Appendicitis 
 Biopsy 
 Cancer 
 Chronic pancreatitis 
 CT scan 
 Diverticulitis 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Endometriosis 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 Peritonitis - spontaneous bacterial 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adhesions 
 Appendicitis 
 Colorectal Cancer 
 Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis 
 Endometriosis 
 Gallstones 
 Liver Cancer 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia