
 Abdominal thrusts 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Choking is when someone is having a very hard time breathing because food, a toy, or other object is blocking the throat or windpipe (airway). A choking person's airway may be blocked so that not enough oxygen reaches the lungs. Without oxygen, brain damage can occur in as little as 4 to 6 minutes. Rapid first aid for choking can save a person's life. Abdominal thrusts is an emergency technique to help clear someone's airway. The procedure is done on someone who is  choking and also conscious . Most experts do not recommend abdominal thrusts for infants less than 1 year old. You can also perform the maneuver  yourself . First Aid 
 
 First ask, "Are you choking? Can you speak?" DO NOT perform first aid if the person is coughing forcefully and is able to speak. A strong cough can often dislodge the object. If the person is choking, perform abdominal thrusts as follows: If the person is sitting or standing, position yourself behind the person and reach your arms around his or her waist. For a child, you may have to kneel. Place your fist, thumb side in, just above the person's navel (belly button). Grasp the fist tightly with your other hand. Make quick, upward and inward thrusts with your fist. If the person is lying on his or her back, straddle the person facing the head. Push your grasped fist upward and inward in a movement similar to the one above. You may need to repeat the procedure several times before the object is dislodged. If repeated attempts do not free the airway, call  911 . If the person loses consciousness,  start CPR .  If you are not comfortable performing abdominal thrusts, you can perform  back blows  instead on a person who is choking. Alternative Names 
 
 Choking - Heimlich maneuver Images 
 
 
 Heimlich maneuver on adult 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 Choking 
 Heimlich maneuver on an adult 
 Heimlich maneuver on conscious child 
 Heimlich maneuver on conscious child 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 References 
 
 American Red Cross.  First Aid/CPR/AED Participant's Manual.  2nd ed. Dallas, TX: American Red Cross; 2014. Berg RA, Hemphill R, Abella BS, et al. Part 5: Adult basic life support: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.  Circulation.  2010;122(18 Supple 3):S685-705. PMID: 20956221  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20956221 . Thomas SH, Goodloe JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Choking - adult or child over 1 year 
 Choking - infant under 1 year 
 Choking - unconscious adult or child over 1 year 
 Tracheostomy 
 
 Review Date 4/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Choking 
 First Aid 
 Browse the Encyclopedia