
 Acanthosis nigricans 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acanthosis nigricans (AN) is a skin disorder in which there is darker, thick, velvety skin in body folds and creases. Causes 
 
 AN can affect otherwise healthy people. It can also be related to medical problems, such as: Genetic disorders, including  Down syndrome Hormone disorders, such as diabetes, obesity Cancer, such as cancer of the digestive system, liver, kidney, bladder, or lymphoma Some medicines, including hormones such as human growth hormone or  birth control pills Symptoms 
 
 AN usually appears slowly and doesn't cause any symptoms other than skin changes. Eventually, dark, velvety skin with very visible markings and creases appears in the armpits, groin and neck folds, and over the joints of the fingers and toes. Sometimes, the lips, palms, soles of the feet, or other areas are affected. These symptoms are more common in people with cancer. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can usually diagnose AN by looking at your skin. A  skin biopsy  may be needed in rare cases. If there is no clear cause of AN, your provider may order tests. These may include: Blood tests to check blood sugar level or insulin level Endoscopy X-rays Treatment 
 
 No treatment is needed, as AN only causes a change in skin color. If the condition is affecting your appearance, using moisturizers containing ammonium lactate or hydroquinone can help lighten the skin. Certain lasers may also help the appearance. It is important, however, to treat any underlying medical problem that may be causing these skin changes. When AN is related to obesity, losing weight often improves the condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 AN often disappears if the cause can be found and treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop areas of thick, dark, velvety skin. Alternative Names 
 
 AN; Skin pigment disorder - acanthosis nigricans Images 
 
 
 Acanthosis nigricans - close-up 
 Acanthosis nigricans on the hand 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Cutaneous manifestations of internal disease. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 26. Kia KF, Criz PD. Acanthosis nigricans. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 1. Patterson JW. Miscellaneous conditions. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2016:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 
 Review Date 4/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia