
 Acetaminophen overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is a pain medicine. Acetaminophen overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. Acetaminophen overdose is one of the most common poisonings worldwide. People often think that this medicine is very safe. However, it may be deadly if taken in large doses. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Where Found 
 
 Acetaminophen is found in a variety of over-the-counter and prescription pain relievers. Tylenol is a brand name for acetaminophen. Other medicines that contain acatominophen include: Anacin-3 Liquiprin Panadol Percocet Tempra Various cold and flu medicines  Note: This list is not all inclusive. Common dosage forms and strengths: Suppository: 120 mg*, 125 mg, 325 mg, 650 mg Chewable tablets: 80 mg Junior tablets: 160 mg Regular strength: 325 mg Extra strength: 500 mg Liquid: 160 mg/teaspoon (5 milliliters) Drops: 100 mg/mL, 120 mg/2.5 mL  *mg = milligrams You should not take more than 4000 mg of acetaminophen a day. Taking more, especially 7000 mg or more, can lead to a severe overdose if not treated. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Appetite loss Coma Convulsions Diarrhea Irritability Jaundice Nausea Sweating Upset stomach Vomiting  Note: Symptoms may not occur until 12 or more hours after the acetaminophen was swallowed. Home Care 
 
 There is no home treatment. Seek immediate medical help. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.This is a free and confidential service.  All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room  
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood tests will be done to check how much acetaminophen is in the blood. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT (computerized tomography, or advanced imaging) scan EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Some people may require specialized medications (antidote) if poisoning is serious. People with liver disease are more likely to develop serious complications of acetaminophen overdose. Overdose may be either acute (sudden or short-term) or chronic (long-term), depending on the doses taken, and symptoms may therefore vary. Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 If treatment is received within 8 hours of the overdose, there is a very good chance of recovery. However, without rapid treatment, a very large overdose of acetaminophen can lead to liver failure and death in a few days. Alternative Names 
 
 Tylenol overdose; Paracetamol overdose References 
 
 American Association of Poison Control Centers. Practice Guideline: Acetaminophen poisoning: an evidence-based consensus guideline for out-of-hospital management.  Clinical Toxicology . 2006: Vol. 44; pp. 1-18. Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Hendrickson RG, McKeown, MJ. Acetaminophen. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 148. Wolf SJ, Heard K, Sloan EP, Jagoda AS; American College of Emergency Physicians. Clinical policy: critical issues in the management of patients presenting to the emergency department with acetaminophen overdose.  Ann Emerg Med . September 2007: Vol. 50; pp 292-313. 
 Review Date 1/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Medicines and Children 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia