
 Achondrogenesis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Achondrogenesis is a rare type of  growth hormone deficiency  in which there is a defect in the development of bone and cartilage. Causes 
 
 Achondrogenesis is inherited, which means it is passed down through families. Some types are known to be recessive, meaning both parents carry the defective gene. The chance for a subsequent child to be affected is 25%. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Very short trunk, arms, legs, and neck Head appears large in relation to the trunk Small lower jaw Narrow chest  Exams and Tests 
 
 X-rays show bone problems associated with the condition. Treatment 
 
 There is no current therapy. Talk to your health care provider about care decisions. You may want to seek genetic counseling.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is most often very poor. Many infants with achondrogenesis are  stillborn  or die shortly after birth because of  breathing problems  related to the abnormally small chest. Possible Complications 
 
 This condition is often fatal early in life. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition is often diagnosed on the first exam of an infant. References 
 
 Backeljauw PF, Dattani MT, Cohen P, et al. Disorders of growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor secretion and action. In: Sperling MA, ed.  Pediatric Endocrinology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 10. Horton WA, Hecht JT. Disorders involving ion transporters. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 697. Read More 
 
 Growth hormone deficiency - children 
 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Connective Tissue Disorders 
 Dwarfism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia