
 Acquired platelet function defect 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acquired platelet function defects are conditions that prevent clotting elements in the blood called platelets from working as they should. The term acquired means these conditions are not present at birth. Causes 
 
 Platelet disorders can affect the number of platelets, how well they function, or both. A platelet disorder affects normal blood clotting. Disorders that can cause problems in platelet function include: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Chronic myelogenous leukemia Multiple myeloma Primary  myelofibrosis Polycythemia vera Primary thrombocythemia Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura Other causes include: Kidney (renal) failure Medicines such as aspirin, ibuprofen, other anti-inflammatory drugs, penicillin, phenothiazines, and prednisone (after long-term use) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following:  Heavy menstrual periods or prolonged bleeding (more than 5 days each period) Abnormal vaginal bleeding Blood in the urine Bleeding under the skin or into the muscles Bruising  easily or pinpoint red spots on the skin Gastrointestinal bleeding  resulting in  bloody, dark black, or tarry bowel movements ; or  vomiting blood  or material that looks like coffee grounds Nosebleeds Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may done include: Bleeding time Platelet aggregation test Platelet count PT  and  PTT Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at fixing the cause of the problem: Bone marrow disorders are often treated with platelet transfusions or removing platelets from the blood (platelet pheresis).  Chemotherapy may be used to treat an underlying condition that is causing the problem. Platelet function defects caused by kidney failure are treated with dialysis or medicines. Platelet problems caused by a certain medicine are treated by stopping the drug. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, treating the cause of the problem corrects the defect. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding that does not stop easily Anemia  (due to excessive bleeding)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have bleeding and do not know the cause Your symptoms get worse Your symptoms do not improve after you are treated for an acquired platelet function defect  Prevention 
 
 Using medicines as directed can reduce the risk of drug-related acquired platelet function defects. Treating other disorders may also reduce the risk. Some cases cannot be prevented. Alternative Names 
 
 Acquired qualitative platelet disorders; Acquired disorders of platelet function Images 
 
 
 Blood clot formation 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Diz-Kucukkaya R, Lopez JA, Acquired disorders of platelet function. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132. Jobe S, Di Paola J. Congenital and acquired disorders of platelet function. In: Kitchens CS, Kessler CM, Konkle BA, eds.  Consultative Hemostasis and Thrombosis . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Anemia 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Myelofibrosis 
 Platelet count 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia