
 Acrodysostosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acrodysostosis is an extremely rare disorder that is present at birth (congenital). It leads to problems with the bones of the hands, feet, and nose, and intellectual disability. Causes 
 
 Most people with acrodysostosis have no family history of the disease. However, sometimes the condition is passed down from parent to child. Parents with the condition have a 1 in 2 chance of passing the disorder to their children. There is a slightly greater risk with fathers who are older. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of this disorder include: Frequent middle  ear infections Growth problems, short arms and legs Hearing problems Mental deficiency The body doesn't respond to certain hormones, even though hormone levels are normal Unusual looking face Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can usually diagnose this condition with a physical exam. This may show: Advanced bone age Bone deformities in hands and feet Delays in growth Problems with the skin, genitals, teeth, and skeleton Short arms and legs with small hands and feet Short head, measured front to back  Short height Small, upturned broad nose with flat bridge Unusual features of the face (short nose, open mouth, jaw that sticks out) Unusual head Wide-spaced eyes, sometimes with extra skin fold at corner of eye In the first months of life, x-rays may show spotty calcium deposits, called stippling, in bones (especially the nose). Infants may also have: Abnormally short fingers and toes  Early growth of bones in the hands and feet Short bones Shortening of the forearm bones near the wrist Two genes have been linked with this condition, and genetic testing may be done. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the symptoms. Hormones, such as growth hormone, may be given. Surgery to treat bone problems may be done. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Problems depend on the degree of skeletal involvement and  intellectual disability . In general, people do well. Possible Complications 
 
 Acrodysostosis may lead to: Arthritis Carpal tunnel syndrome Worsening range of movement in the spine, elbows, and hands  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your child's provider if signs acrodystosis develop. Make sure your child's height and weight are measured during each well-child visit. The provider may refer you to: A genetic professional for a full evaluation and chromosome studies A pediatric endocrinologist for management of your child's growth problems Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be helpful.  Alternative Names 
 
 Arkless-Graham; Acrodysplasia; Maroteaux-Malamut Images 
 
 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Other skeletal dysplasias. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:560-593. Silve C, Clauser E, Linglart A. Acrodysostosis.  Horm Metab Res . 2012;44(10):749-758. PMID: 22815067  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22815067 . 
 Review Date 10/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia