
 Acromegaly 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acromegaly is a condition in which there is too much growth hormone in the body. Causes 
 
 Acromegaly is a rare condition. It is caused when the pituitary gland makes too much growth hormone. The pituitary gland is a small  endocrine gland  attached to the bottom of the brain. It controls, makes, and releases several hormones, including growth hormone. Usually a noncancerous (benign) tumor of the pituitary gland releases too much growth hormone.  In children, too much growth hormone causes  gigantism  rather than acromegaly. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of acromegaly may include any of the following: Body odor Carpal tunnel syndrome Decreased muscle strength ( weakness ) Decreased peripheral vision Easy  fatigue Excessive height (when excess growth hormone production begins in childhood) Excessive sweating Headache Hoarseness Joint pain , limited joint movement, swelling of the bony areas around a joint Large bones of the face, large jaw and tongue, widely spaced teeth Large feet (change in shoe size), large hands (change in ring or glove size) Large glands in the skin (sebaceous glands), thickening of the skin, skin tags (growths) Sleep apnea Widened fingers or toes, with swelling, redness, and pain  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Colon polyps Excess hair growth in females ( hirsutism ) Type 2 diabetes Weight gain (unintentional)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. The following tests may be ordered to confirm diagnosis of acromegaly: Blood glucose Growth hormone   High insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) level Spine x-ray MRI of the brain , including the pituitary gland Echocardiogram Prolactin Other tests may be ordered to check whether the rest of the pituitary gland is working normally. Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the pituitary tumor that is causing this condition often corrects the abnormal growth hormone. Sometimes the tumor is too large to be removed completely and acromegaly is not cured. In this case medicines and  radiation  (radiotherapy) may be used to treat acromegaly. Some people with tumors that are too complicated to remove by surgery are treated with medicines instead of surgery. After treatment, you will need to see your provider regularly to make sure that the pituitary gland is working normally and that acromegaly does not come back. Yearly evaluations are recommended. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pituitary surgery is successful in most people, depending on the size of the  tumor  and the experience of the surgeon. Without treatment, the symptoms will get worse. Conditions such as high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease may result. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if:  You have symptoms of acromegaly Your symptoms do not improve with treatment Prevention 
 
 Acromegaly cannot be prevented. Early treatment may prevent the disease from getting worse and help avoid complications. Alternative Names 
 
 Somatotroph adenoma; Growth hormone excess; Pituitary giant (in childhood) Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Katznelson L, Laws ER Jr, Melmed S, et al. Acromegaly: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2014;99:3933-3951. PMID: 25356808  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25356808 . Melmed S. Acromegaly. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Chronic 
 Diabetes 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Spinal cord trauma 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Growth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia