
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a life-threatening lung condition that prevents enough oxygen from getting to the lungs and into the blood.  Infants can also have respiratory distress syndrome . Causes 
 
 ARDS can be caused by any major direct or indirect injury to the lung. Common causes include: Breathing vomit into the lungs (aspiration) 
   Inhaling chemicals
    
   Lung transplant
    Pneumonia Septic shock  (infection throughout the body)
    
   Trauma
    ARDS leads to a buildup of fluid in the air sacs (alveoli). This fluid prevents enough oxygen from passing into the bloodstream. The fluid buildup also makes the lungs heavy and stiff, which decreases the lungs' ability to expand. The level of oxygen in the blood can stay dangerously low, even if the person receives oxygen from a breathing machine ( ventilator ) through a breathing tube (endotracheal tube). ARDS often occurs along with the failure of other organ systems, such as the liver or  kidneys . Cigarette smoking and heavy alcohol use may be risk factors. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually develop within 24 to 48 hours of the injury or illness. Often, people with ARDS are so sick they cannot complain of symptoms. Symptoms can include any of the following: Difficulty breathing  Low blood pressure and organ failure Rapid breathing Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 Listening to the chest with a stethoscope ( auscultation ) reveals abnormal breath sounds, such as crackles, which may be signs of fluid in the lungs. Often, blood pressure is low.  Cyanosis  (blue skin, lips, and nails caused by lack of oxygen to the tissues) is often seen. Tests used to diagnose ARDS include: Arterial blood gas Blood tests, including  CBC  and blood chemistries Blood  and  urine  cultures Bronchoscopy  in some people Chest x-ray Sputum cultures  and analysis Tests for possible infections  An  echocardiogram  may be needed to rule out  heart failure , which can look similar to ARDS on a chest x-ray. Treatment 
 
 ARDS often needs to be treated in an intensive care unit (ICU). The goal of treatment is to provide breathing support and treat the cause of ARDS. This may involve medicines to treat infections, reduce inflammation, and remove fluid from the lungs. A ventilator is used to deliver high doses of oxygen and positive pressure to the damaged lungs. People often need to be deeply sedated with medicines. During treatment, health care providers make every effort to protect the lungs from further damage. Treatment is mainly supportive until the lungs recover. Support Groups 
 
 Many family members of people with ARDS are under extreme stress. They can often relieve this stress by joining  support groups  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 About one third of people with ARDS die of the disease. Those who live often get back most of their normal lung function, but many people have permanent (usually mild) lung damage. Many people who survive ARDS have memory loss or other quality-of-life problems after they recover. This is due to brain damage that occurred when the lungs were not working properly and the brain was not getting enough oxygen. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result from ARDS or its treatment include: Failure of many organ systems Lung damage, such as a collapsed lung (also called  pneumothorax ) due to injury from the breathing machine needed to treat the disease Pulmonary fibrosis  (scarring of the lung) Ventilator-associated pneumonia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 ARDS most often occurs during another illness, for which the person is already in the hospital. In some cases, a healthy person has severe pneumonia that gets worse and becomes ARDS. If you have trouble breathing, call your local emergency number (such as 911) or go to the emergency room. Alternative Names 
 
 Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; Increased-permeability pulmonary edema; ARDS; Acute lung injury Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Bersten AD. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. In: Berstein AD, Soni N, eds.  Oh's Intensive Care Manual . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 33. Lee WL, Slutsky AS. Acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and ARDS. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 100. Read More 
 
 Avian influenza 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 Flu 
 H1N1 influenza (Swine flu) 
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
 Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 When your baby or infant has a fever 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Respiratory Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia