
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing cancer of a type of white blood cell called a lymphoblast.  ALL occurs when the bone marrow produces a large number of immature lymphoblasts. Bone marrow is the soft tissue in the center of bones that helps form all blood cells. The abnormal lymphoblasts grow quickly and replace normal cells in the bone marrow. ALL prevents healthy blood cells from being made. Life-threatening symptoms can occur as normal blood counts drop. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, no clear cause can be found for ALL.  The following factors may play a role in the development of all types of leukemia: Certain chromosome problems Exposure to radiation, including x-rays before birth Past treatment with  chemotherapy  drugs Receiving a bone marrow transplant Toxins , such as benzene  The following factors are known to increase the risk of ALL: Down syndrome  or other genetic disorders A brother or sister with leukemia  This type of leukemia usually affects children ages 3 to 7. ALL is the most common childhood cancer, but it can also occur in adults. Symptoms 
 
 ALL makes a person more likely to bleed and develop infections. Symptoms include: Bone and joint pain Easy bruising and bleeding (such as bleeding gums, skin bleeding, nosebleeds, abnormal periods) Feeling weak or tired Fever Loss of appetite and weight loss Paleness Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs Pinpoint red spots  on the skin (petechiae) Swollen lymph nodes  in the neck, under arms, and groin Night sweats  These symptoms can occur with other conditions. Talk to a health care provider about the meaning of specific symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may reveal the following: Bruising Enlarged liver , lymph nodes, and spleen Signs of bleeding (petechiae,  purpura )  Blood tests may include: Complete blood count (CBC), including  white blood cell (WBC) count Platelet count Bone marrow biopsy Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to check for leukemia cells in the spinal fluid  Tests are also done to look for changes in the DNA inside the abnormal white cells. Certain DNA changes may determine how well a person does (prognosis), and what kind of treatment is recommended. Treatment 
 
 The first goal of treatment is to get blood counts back to normal. If this occurs and the bone marrow looks healthy under the microscope, the cancer is said to be in remission.  Chemotherapy  is the first treatment tried with the goal of achieving a remission. The person may need to stay in the hospital for chemotherapy. Or it can be given at a clinic and the person goes home afterward. Chemotherapy is given into the veins (by IV) and sometimes into the fluid around the brain (the spinal fluid).  After a remission is achieved, more treatment is given to achieve a cure. This treatment can include more IV chemotherapy or 
 radiation to the brain .  Stem cell  or, bone marrow, transplant from another person may also be done. Further treatment depends on: Age and health of the person Genetic changes in the leukemia cells How many courses of chemotherapy it took to achieve remission If abnormal cells are still detected under the microscope Availability of donors for stem cell transplant  You and your provider may need to manage other concerns during your leukemia treatment, including: Having chemotherapy at home Managing your pets  during chemotherapy Bleeding problems Dry mouth Eating enough calories Safe eating  during cancer treatment  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Those who respond to treatment right away tend to do better. Most children with ALL can be cured. Children often have a better outcome than adults. Possible Complications 
 
 Both leukemia itself and the treatment can lead to many problems such as bleeding, weight loss, and infections. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child develops symptoms of ALL. Prevention 
 
 The risk of developing ALL may be reduced by avoiding contact with certain toxins, radiation, and chemicals. Alternative Names 
 
 ALL; Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; Acute lymphoid leukemia; Acute childhood leukemia; Cancer - acute childhood leukemia (ALL); Leukemia - acute childhood (ALL); Acute lymphocytic leukemia Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Acute lymphocytic leukemia - photomicrograph 
 Auer rods 
 Bone marrow from hip 
 Immune system structures 
 References 
 
 Jeha S, Pui CH. Clinical manifestations and treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 64. National Cancer Institute: PDQ adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated January 26, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/adultALL/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Cancer Institute: PDQ childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated December 10, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childALL/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/all.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Chemotherapy 
 Toxins 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Eating extra calories when sick - adults 
 Mouth and neck radiation - discharge 
 Oral mucositis - self-care 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia