
 Acute arterial occlusion - kidney 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute arterial occlusion of the kidney is a sudden, severe blockage of the artery that supplies blood to the kidney. Causes 
 
 The kidneys need a good blood supply. The main artery to the kidney is called the renal artery. Reduced blood flow through the  renal  artery can hurt kidney function. A complete blockage of blood flow to the kidney can often result in permanent kidney failure. Acute arterial occlusion of the renal artery can occur after injury or trauma to the abdomen, side, or back. Blood clots that travel through the bloodstream ( emboli ) can lodge in the renal artery. Pieces of plaque from the walls of the arteries can come loose (on their own or during a procedure). This debris can block the main kidney artery or one of the smaller vessels.  The risk of renal artery blockages increases in people who have certain heart disorders, which make them likely to form blood clots. These include  mitral stenosis  and  atrial fibrillation . A narrowing of the renal artery is called  renal artery stenosis . This condition increases the risk of a sudden blockage.  Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms when one kidney does not function because the second kidney can filter the blood. However, high blood pressure (hypertension) may come on suddenly and be difficult to control.  If your other kidney is not working fully, blockage of the renal artery may cause symptoms of  acute kidney failure . Other symptoms of acute arterial occlusion of the renal artery include: Abdominal pain Abrupt decrease in urine output Back pain Blood in the urine Flank pain  or pain in the side Symptoms of high blood pressure such as headache, change in vision, and swelling  Note: There may be no pain. Pain, if it is present, most often develops suddenly. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will not be able to identify the problem with just an exam unless you have developed kidney failure.  Tests you may need include: Duplex Doppler ultrasound exam of the renal arteries to test blood flow MRI  of the kidney arteries, which can show a lack of blood flow to the affected kidney Renal arteriography  shows the exact location of the blockage Renal nuclear scan  shows a lack of blood flow to the affected kidney Ultrasound  of the kidney to check kidney size  Treatment 
 
 Often, people do not need treatment. Blood clots may get better on their own over time. You may have treatment to open the artery if the blockage is discovered quickly or it is affecting the only working kidney. Treatment to open the artery may include: Clot-dissolving medicines (thrombolytics) Medicines that prevent the blood from clotting (anticoagulants), such as warfarin (Coumadin) Surgical repair of the renal artery Insertion of a tube (catheter) into the renal artery to open the blockage You may need temporary  dialysis  to treat acute kidney failure. Medicines to lower cholesterol may be needed if the blockage is due to clots from plaque buildup in the arteries.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Damage caused by arterial occlusion may go away. However, in most cases it is permanent. If only one kidney is affected, the healthy kidney may take over filtering the blood and producing urine. If you have only one working kidney, arterial occlusion leads to acute kidney failure. This can develop into  chronic kidney failure . Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute kidney failure Chronic kidney disease High blood pressure Malignant hypertension When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You stop producing urine You feel sudden, severe pain in the back, flank, or abdomen. Get emergency medical help right away if you have symptoms of arterial occlusion and have only one working kidney.  Prevention 
 
 In many cases, the disorder is not preventable. The most important way to reduce your risk is to stop smoking. People at risk for developing blood clots may need to take anti-clotting medicines. Taking steps to control diseases related to atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) may reduce your risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Acute renal arterial thrombosis; Renal artery embolism; Acute renal artery occlusion; Embolism - renal artery Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 Kidney blood supply 
 References 
 
 DuBose TD Jr, Santos RM. Vascular disorders of the kidney. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 125. Ruggenenti P, Cravede P, Remuzzi G. Microvascular and macrovascular diseases of the kidney. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 34. Scolari F, Ravani P. Atheroembolic renal disease.  Lancet . 2010;8:375(9726):1650-60. PMID: 20381857  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20381857 .  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Blood clots 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 High blood pressure 
 Malignant hypertension 
 Renal 
 
 Review Date 5/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, Private Practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia