
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute nephritic syndrome is a group of symptoms that occur with some disorders that cause swelling and inflammation of the glomeruli in the kidney, or  glomerulonephritis . Causes 
 
 Acute nephritic syndrome is often caused by an  immune response  triggered by an infection or other disease. Common causes in children and adolescents include: Hemolytic uremic syndrome Henoch-Schönlein purpura IgA nephropathy Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis Common causes in adults include: Abdominal  abscesses Goodpasture syndrome Hepatitis  B or C Infective endocarditis Membranoproliferative GN I Membranoproliferative GN II Rapidly progressive (crescentic) glomerulonephritis SLE  or  lupus nephritis Vasculitis Viral diseases such as  mononucleosis ,  measles ,  mumps The inflammation affects the function of the glomerulus. This is the part of the kidney that filters blood to make urine and remove waste. As a result, blood and protein appear in the urine, and excess fluid builds up in the body. Swelling of the body occurs when the blood loses a protein called albumin. Albumin keeps fluid in the blood vessels. When it is lost, fluid collects in the body tissues. Blood loss from the damaged kidney structures leads to  blood in the urine . Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of nephritic syndrome are: Blood in the urine (urine appears dark, tea-colored, or cloudy) Decreased urine output  (little or no urine may be produced) Swelling of the face, eye socket, legs, arms, hands, feet, abdomen, or other areas High blood pressure Other symptoms that may occur include: Blurred vision , usually from burst blood vessels in the retina of the eye Cough  containing mucus or pink, frothy material from fluid buildup in the lungs Shortness of breath, from fluid buildup in the lungs General ill feeling  (malaise),  drowsiness ,  confusion , aches and pains,  headache Symptoms of  acute kidney failure  or chronic kidney disease may develop. Exams and Tests 
 
 During an examination, your health care provider may find the following signs: High blood pressure Abnormal heart and lung sounds Signs of excess fluid (edema) such as swelling in the legs, arms, face, and belly Enlarged liver Enlarged veins in the neck Tests that may be done include: Blood  electrolytes Blood urea nitrogen  (BUN) Creatinine  - blood Creatinine clearance Potassium test Protein in the urine Urinalysis Urine appearance and color A  kidney biopsy  will show inflammation of the glomeruli, which may indicate the cause of the condition. Tests to find the cause of acute nephritic syndrome may include: ANA  titer ( lupus ) Antiglomerular basement membrane  antibody Antineutrophil cytoplasmic  antibody  for vasculitis (ANCA) Blood culture Culture of the throat  or skin Serum  complement  ( C3  and  C4 ) Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce inflammation in the kidney and control high blood pressure. You may need to stay in a hospital to be diagnosed and treated. Your provider may recommend: Bedrest until you feel better with treatment A diet that limits salt, fluids, and potassium Medicines to control high blood pressure, reduce inflammation, or to remove fluid from your body Kidney dialysis , if needed Support Groups 
 
 You can often ease the stress of illness by joining  support groups  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the disease that is causing the nephritis. When the condition improves, symptoms of fluid retention (such as swelling and cough) and high blood pressure may go away in 1 or 2 weeks. Urine tests may take months to return to normal. Children tend to do better than adults and usually recover completely. Only rarely do they develop complications or progress to chronic glomerulonephritis and chronic kidney disease. Adults do not recover as well or as quickly as children. Although it is unusual for the disease to return, in some adults, the disease does return and they will develop  end-stage kidney disease  and may need  dialysis  or a  kidney transplant . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of acute nephritic syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Often, the disorder cannot be prevented, although treatment of illness and infection may help to reduce the risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Glomerulonephritis - acute; Acute glomerulonephritis; Nephritis syndrome - acute Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Appel GB, Radhakrishnan. Glomerular disorders and nephrotic syndromes. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 121. Nachman PH, Hennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Goodpasture syndrome 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
 Henoch-Schönlein purpura 
 Hepatitis 
 High blood pressure 
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
 IgA nephropathy 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Measles 
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
 Mononucleosis 
 Mumps 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Typhoid fever 
 Urine - bloody  
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia