
 Adhesion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adhesions are bands of scar-like tissue that form between two surfaces inside the body and cause them to stick together. Causes 
 
 As the body moves, tissues or organs inside are normally able to shift around each other. This is because these tissues have slippery surfaces. Inflammation (swelling), surgery, or injury can cause adhesions to form and prevent this movement. Adhesions can occur almost anywhere in the body, including: Joints, such as the shoulder Eyes Inside the abdomen or pelvis Adhesions can become larger or tighter over time. Problems may occur if the adhesions cause an organ or body part to: Twist Pull out of position Be unable to move normally The risk of forming adhesions is high after bowel or female organ surgeries. Surgery using a laparoscope is less likely to cause adhesions than open surgery. Other causes of adhesions in the abdomen or pelvis include: Appendicitis , most often when the appendix breaks open (ruptures) Cancer Endometriosis Infections in the abdomen and pelvis Radiation treatment Adhesions around the joints may occur: After surgery or trauma With certain types of arthritis With overuse of a joint or tendon Symptoms 
 
 Adhesions in joints, tendons, or ligaments make it harder to move the joint. They may also cause pain. Adhesions in the belly (abdomen) may cause a  blockage of the intestines . Symptoms include: Bloating or swelling of your belly Constipation Nausea and vomiting No longer being able to pass gas Pain in the belly that is severe and crampy  Adhesions in the pelvis may cause long-term (chronic) pelvic pain. Exams and Tests 
 
 Most of the time, the adhesions cannot be seen using x-rays or imaging tests. Hysterosalpingography  may help diagnose adhesions inside the uterus or fallopian tubes. X-rays of the abdomen, barium contrast studies, and CT scans may help diagnose a blockage of the intestines caused by adhesions. Endoscopy (a way of looking inside the body using a flexible tube that has a small camera on the end) may help diagnose adhesions: Hysteroscopy looks inside the uterus Laparoscopy  looks inside the abdomen and pelvis Treatment 
 
 Surgery may be done to separate the adhesions. This can let the organ regain normal movement and reduce symptoms. However, the risk for more adhesions goes up with more surgeries. Depending on the location of the adhesions, a barrier may be placed at the time of surgery to help reduce the chance of the adhesions returning. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is good in most cases. Possible Complications 
 
 Adhesions can cause various disorders, depending on the tissues affected. In the eye, adhesion of the iris to the lens can lead to  glaucoma . In the intestines, adhesions can cause partial or complete  bowel obstruction . Adhesions inside the uterine cavity, called  Asherman syndrome , can cause a woman to have irregular menstrual cycles and be unable to get pregnant. Pelvic adhesions that involve scarring of the fallopian tubes can lead to  infertility  and reproductive problems. Abdominal and pelvic adhesions can cause chronic pain.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Abdominal pain An inability to pass gas Nausea and vomiting that do not go away Pain in the belly that is severe and crampy Alternative Names 
 
 Pelvic adhesion; Intraperitoneal adhesion; Intrauterine adhesion Images 
 
 
 Pelvic adhesions 
 Ovarian cyst 
 References 
 
 Kulaylat MN, Dayton MT. Surgical complications. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 13. Nakamura N, Rodeo SA, Alini M, Maher S, Madry H, Erggelet C. Physiology and pathophysuiology of musculoskeletal tissues. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 1. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Asherman syndrome 
 Glaucoma 
 Infertility 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adhesions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia