
 Adjustment disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Adjustment disorder is a group of symptoms, such as stress, feeling sad or hopeless, and physical symptoms that can occur after you go through a stressful life event. The symptoms occur because you are having a hard time coping. Your reaction is stronger than expected for the type of event that occurred. Causes 
 
 Many different events may trigger symptoms of an adjustment disorder. Whatever the trigger is, the event may become too much for you. Stressors for people of any age include: 
  Death of a loved one
   
  Divorce or problems with a relationship
   
  General life changes
   
  Illness or other health issues in yourself or a loved one
   
  Moving to a different home or a different city
   
  Unexpected catastrophes
   
  Worries about money
   Triggers of stress in teenagers and young adults may include: Family problems or conflict School problems Sexuality issues  There is no way to predict which people who are affected by the same stress are likely to develop adjustment disorder. Your social skills before the event, and how you have learned to deal with stress in the past may play roles.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of adjustment disorder are often severe enough to affect work or social life. Symptoms include: Acting defiant or showing impulsive behavior Acting nervous or tense Crying, feeling sad or hopeless, and possibly withdrawing from other people Skipped heartbeats and other physical complaints Trembling or twitching  To have adjustment disorder, you must have the following: The symptoms clearly come after a stressor, most often within 3 months The symptoms are more severe than would be expected There do not appear to be other disorders involved The symptoms are not part of normal grieving for the death of a loved one  Sometimes, symptoms can be severe and the person may have thoughts of suicide or make a suicide attempt. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a mental health assessment to find out about your behavior and symptoms. You may be referred to a psychiatrist to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 The main goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms and help you return to a similar level of functioning as before the stressful event occurred. Most mental health professionals recommend some type of talk therapy. This type of therapy can help you identify or change your responses to the stressors in your life.  Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of talk therapy. It can help you deal with your feelings: First the therapist helps you recognize the negative feelings and thoughts that occur. Then the therapist teaches you how to change these into helpful thoughts and healthy actions.  Other types of therapy may include:  
  Long-term therapy, where you will explore your thoughts and feelings over many months or more
   
  Family therapy, where you will meet with a therapist along with your family
   
  Self-help groups, where the support of others may help you get better
   Medicines may be used, but only along with talk therapy. These medicines may help if you are: Nervous or anxious most of the time Not sleeping very well Very sad or depressed  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With the right help and support, you should get better quickly. The problem usually does not last longer than 6 months, unless the stressor continues to be present.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you develop symptoms of adjustment disorder. References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Powell AD. Grief, bereavement, and adjustment disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 38. Strain JJ, Friedman MJ. Adjustment disorders. In: Gabbard GO, ed.  Gabbard's Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2014:chap 29. 
 Review Date 2/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mental Disorders 
 Stress 
 Browse the Encyclopedia