
 Adrenal glands 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The adrenal glands are two triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney.  Information 
 
 Each adrenal gland is about the size of the top part of the thumb. The outer part of the gland is called the cortex. It produces steroid hormones such as cortisol, aldosterone, and hormones that can be changed into testosterone. The inner part of the gland is called the medulla. It produces epinephrine and norepinephrine. These hormones are also called adrenaline and noradrenaline. When the glands produce more or less hormones than normal, you can become sick. This might happen at birth or later in life. The adrenal glands can be affected by many diseases, such as  autoimmune disorders , infections,  tumors , and bleeding. Conditions related to adrenal gland problems include: Addison disease  (also called  adrenal insufficiency ) Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Cushing syndrome Diabetes - caused by another medical problem Glucocorticoid medicines 
   Excessive or unwanted hair in women ( hirsutism ) Hump behind shoulders  (dorsocervical fat pad) Hypoglycemia Primary aldosteronism  (Conn syndrome) Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Adrenal glands 
 Adrenal gland biopsy 
 References 
 
 Friedman TC. Adrenal gland. In: Benjamin IJ, Griggs RC, Wing EJ, Fitz JG, eds.  Andreoli and Carpenter's Cecil Essentials of Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 64. Standring S. Suprarenal (adrenal) gland. In: Standring S, ed.  Gray's Anatomy . 41st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 71. Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Catecholamine blood test 
 
 Review Date 5/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Adrenal Gland Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia