
 Aging changes in immunity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Your immune system helps protect your body from foreign or harmful substances. Examples are bacteria, viruses, toxins, cancer cells, and blood or tissues from another person. The immune system makes cells and  antibodies  that destroy these harmful substances. AGING CHANGES AND THEIR EFFECTS ON THE IMMUNE SYSTEM As you grow older, your immune system does not work as well. The following immune system changes may occur: The immune system becomes slower to respond. This increases your risk of getting sick. Flu shots or other vaccines may not work as well or protect you for as long as expected. An  autoimmune disorder  may develop. This is a disease in which the immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys healthy body tissues. Your body may heal more slowly. There are fewer immune cells in the body to bring about healing. The immune system's ability to detect and correct cell defects also declines. This can result in an increased risk of  cancer .  PREVENTION To decrease the risks from immune system aging: Get the flu and pneumonia vaccines, and any other vaccines your health care provider recommends. Get plenty of exercise. Exercise helps boost your immune system. Eat healthy foods. Good nutrition keeps your immune system strong. DO NOT smoke. Smoking weakens your immune system. Limit your intake of alcohol . Ask your provider how much alcohol is safe for you. Look into safety measures to prevent falls and injuries. A weak immune system can slow healing.  OTHER CHANGES As you grow older, you will have other changes, including in your: Hormone production Organs, tissues, and cells Images 
 
 
 Immune system structures 
 References 
 
 McDevitt MA. Aging and the blood. In: Fillit HM, Rockwood K, Young J, eds.  Brocklehurst's Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 24. Tummala MK, Taub DD, Ershler WB. Clinical immunology: immune senescence and the acquired immune deficiency of aging In: Fillit HM, Rockwood K, Young J, eds.  Brocklehurst's Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 93. Walston JD. Common clinical sequelae of aging. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 25. 
 Review Date 8/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Immune System and Disorders 
 Seniors' Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia