
 Aging changes in vital signs 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vital signs  include body temperature, heart rate (pulse), breathing rate, and blood pressure. As you age, your vital signs may change, depending on how healthy you are. Some medical problems can cause changes in one or more vital signs. Checking your vital signs helps your health care provider monitor your health and any medical problems you may have. 
BODY TEMPERATURE
 Normal body temperature  does not change much with aging. But as you get older, it becomes harder for your body to control its temperature. A decrease in the amount of fat below the skin makes it harder to stay warm. You may need to wear layers of clothing to feel warm. Aging decreases your ability to sweat. You may have difficulty telling when you are becoming overheated. This puts you at high risk of overheating ( heat stroke ). You can also be at risk for dangerous drops in body temperature. Fever  is an important sign of illness in older people. It is often the only symptom for several days of an illness. See your provider if you have a fever that is not explained by a known illness. A fever is also a sign of infection. When an older person has an infection, their body may not be able to produce a higher temperature. For this reason, it is important to check other vital signs, as well as any symptoms and signs of infection. 
HEART RATE AND BREATHING RATE
 As you grow older, your pulse rate is about the same as before. But when you exercise, it may take longer for your pulse to increase and longer for it to slow down afterward. Your highest heart rate with exercise is also lower than it was when you were younger. Breathing rate usually does not change with age. But  lung function  decreases slightly. Healthy older people can usually breathe without effort. 
BLOOD PRESSURE
 Older people may become  dizzy  when standing up too quickly. This is due to a sudden drop in blood pressure. This kind of drop in blood pressure when standing is called orthostatic  hypotension . Risk of having high blood pressure ( hypertension ) increases as you get older. Other heart-related problems common in older adults include: Very  slow pulse  or very fast pulse Heart rhythm problems such as  atrial fibrillation 
EFFECTS OF MEDICINES ON VITAL SIGNS 
 Medicines that are used to treat health problems in older people can affect the vital signs. For example, the medicine digoxin used for  heart failure  and blood pressure medicines called beta-blockers may cause the pulse to slow. Diuretics (water pills) can cause low blood pressure, most often when changing body position too quickly. 
OTHER CHANGES As you grow older, you will have other changes, including:
 In organs, tissues, and cells In the heart and blood vessels In the lungs Images 
 
 
 Aerobic exercise 
 Taking your carotid pulse 
 Radial pulse 
 Warming up and cooling down 
 Effects of age on blood pressure 
 References 
 
 Chester JG, Rudolph JL. Vital signs in older patients: age-related changes.  J Am Med Dir Assoc . 2011;12(5):337-343. PMID: 21450180  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21450180 . Schiger DL. Approach to the patient with abnormal vital signs. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 8. Walston JD. Common clinical sequelae of aging. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 25. 
 Review Date 8/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Seniors' Health 
 Vital Signs 
 Browse the Encyclopedia