
 Alcoholic liver disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alcoholic liver disease is damage to the liver and its function due to  alcohol abuse . Causes 
 
 Alcoholic liver disease occurs after years of heavy drinking. Over time, scarring and  cirrhosis  can occur. Cirrhosis is the final phase of alcoholic liver disease. Alcoholic liver disease does not occur in all heavy drinkers. The chances of getting liver disease go up the longer you have been drinking and more alcohol you consume. You do not have to get drunk for the disease to happen. The disease seems to be more common in some families. Women may be more likely to have this problem than men. Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms, or symptoms may come on slowly, depending on how well the liver is working. Symptoms tend to be worse after a period of heavy drinking. Early symptoms include: Fatigue and loss of energy Poor appetite and weight loss Nausea or belly pain Small, red spider-like blood vessels on the skin As liver function worsens, symptoms may include: Fluid buildup of the legs (edema) and in the abdomen (ascites) Yellow color in the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes (jaundice) Redness on the palms of the hands In men, impotence, shrinking of the testicles, and breast swelling Easy bruising and abnormal bleeding Confusion or problems thinking Pale or clay-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to look for: An enlarged liver or spleen Excess breast tissue Swollen abdomen, as a result of too much fluid Reddened palms Red spider-like blood vessels on the skin Small testicles Widened veins in the abdomen wall Yellow eyes or skin (jaundice) Tests you may have include: Complete blood count (CBC) Liver biopsy Liver function tests Coagulation studies Tests to rule out other diseases include: Abdominal CT scan Blood tests for other causes of liver disease Ultrasound of the abdomen Treatment 
 
 LIFESTYLE CHANGES Some things you can do to help take care of your liver disease are: Drink less alcohol. Eat a healthy diet that is low in salt. Get vaccinated for diseases such as influenza, hepatitis A and hepatitis B, and pneumococcal pneumonia. Talk to your doctor about all medicines you take, including herbs and supplements and over-the-counter medicines. MEDICINES FROM YOUR DOCTOR "Water pills" (diuretics) to get rid of fluid build-up Vitamin K or blood products to prevent excess bleeding Medicines for mental confusion Antibiotics for infections OTHER TREATMENTS Endoscopic treatments for enlarged veins in the throat (bleeding varices) Removal of fluid from the abdomen (paracentesis) Placement of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) to repair blood flow in the liver When cirrhosis progresses to end-stage liver disease, a liver transplant may be needed. Support Groups 
 
 Many people benefit from joining support groups for  alcoholism  or  liver disease .  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Continued excessive drinking can shorten your lifespan. Your risk for complications such as bleeding, brain changes, and severe liver damage go up. The outcome will likely be poor if you keep drinking. Cirrhosis is caused by scarring of the liver. In most cases, the liver cannot heal or return to normal function once the damage is severe. Cirrhosis can lead to serious complications. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding disorders (coagulopathy) Buildup of fluid in the abdomen (ascites) and infection of the fluid (bacterial peritonitis) Enlarged veins in the esophagus, stomach, or intestines that bleed easily (esophageal varices) Increased pressure in the blood vessels of the liver (portal hypertension) Kidney failure (hepatorenal syndrome) Liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma) Mental confusion, change in the level of consciousness, or coma (hepatic encephalopathy) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of alcoholic liver disease. You develop symptoms after a long period of heavy drinking. You are worried that drinking may be harming your health. Get emergency medical help right away if you have: Abdominal or chest pain Abdominal swelling or ascites that is new or suddenly becomes worse A fever (temperature greater than 101°F, or 38.3°C) Diarrhea New confusion or a change in alertness, or it gets worse Rectal bleeding, vomiting blood, or blood in the urine Shortness of breath Vomiting more than once a day Yellowing skin or eyes (jaundice) that is new or gets worse quickly Prevention 
 
 Talk to your provider about your alcohol intake. The provider can counsel you about how much alcohol is safe for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Liver disease due to alcohol; Cirrhosis or hepatitis - alcoholic; Laennec's cirrhosis  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 References 
 
 Carithers RL, McClain C. Alcoholic liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ.  Feldman: Sleisinger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 86. Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer Al, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Garcia-Tsao G, Lim JK; Members of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center Program. Management and treatment of patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension: recommendations from the Department of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center Program and the National Hepatitis C Program.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2009;104:1802-1829. PMID: 19455106  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19455106 . O'Shea RS, Dasarathy S, McCullough AJ. Alcoholic liver disease.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2010;105(1):14-32. PMID: 19904248  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19904248 . Schuppan D, Afdhal NH. Liver cirrhosis.  Lancet . 2008;371:838-851.  Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Bleeding esophageal varices 
 Chronic 
 Cirrhosis 
 Liver disease 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Malabsorption 
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia