
 Alcoholic ketoacidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alcoholic ketoacidosis is the buildup of ketones in the blood. Ketones are a type of acid that form when the body breaks down fat for energy. The condition is an  acute  form of  metabolic acidosis . Causes 
 
 Alcoholic ketoacidosis is caused by very heavy alcohol use. It most often occurs in a  malnourished  person who drinks large amounts of alcohol every day. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of alcoholic ketoacidosis include: Nausea and vomiting Abdominal pain Agitation Changed level of alertness, which may lead to coma Confusion Fatigue Slow, sluggish movements Deep, labored,  rapid breathing Loss of appetite Symptoms of  dehydration , such as dizziness, light-headedness, and thirst Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: Arterial blood gases (measure the acid/base balance and oxygen level in blood) Blood alcohol level Blood chemistries, and liver function tests CBC (complete blood count, measures red and white blood cells, and platelets, which help blood to clot) Prothrombin time (PT, a different measure of blood clotting, often abnormal from liver disease) Toxicology (poison) screening Urine ketones Treatment 
 
 Treatment may involve fluids (salt and sugar solution) given through a vein. You may need to have frequent blood tests. You may get vitamin supplements to treat nutritional deficiencies caused by excess alcohol use. People with this condition are usually admitted to the hospital, often to the intensive care unit (ICU). Additional medicines may be given to prevent alcohol withdrawal.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt medical attention improves the overall outlook. How severe the alcoholism is, and the presence of liver disease or other problems, may also affect the outlook. Possible Complications 
 
 This can be a life-threatening condition. Complications may include: Coma and seizures Gastrointestinal bleeding Inflamed pancreas Pneumonia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you or someone else has symptoms of alcoholic ketoacidosis, seek emergency medical help. Prevention 
 
 Limiting the amount of alcohol you drink may help prevent this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Ketoacidosis - alcoholic References 
 
 Carpenter CR. Alcoholic ketoacidosis, In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 161. Seifter JL. Acid-Base disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 Browse the Encyclopedia