
 Alcohol use disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alcohol use disorder is when your drinking causes serious problems in your life, yet you keep drinking. You may also need more and more alcohol to feel drunk. Stopping suddenly may cause  withdrawal symptoms .  Causes 
 
 No one knows what causes problems with alcohol. Health experts think that it may be a combination of a person's: Genes Environment Psychology, such as being impulsive or having low self-esteem  Drinking an excessive amount of alcohol can put you at risk for alcohol-related problems if: You are a man who has 15 or more drinks a week, or often have 5 or more drinks at a time You are a woman who has 8 or more drinks a week, or often have 4 or more drinks at a time  One drink is defined as 12 ounces or 360 milliliters (mL) of beer (5% alcohol content), 5 ounces or 150 mL of wine (12% alcohol content), or a 1.5-ounce or 45-mL shot of liquor (80-proof, or 40% alcohol content). If you have a parent with alcohol use disorder, you are more at risk for alcohol problems.  You also may be more likely to have problems with alcohol if you: Are a young adult under peer pressure Have depression,  bipolar disorder ,  anxiety disorders , or  schizophrenia Can easily obtain alcohol Have low self-esteem Have problems with relationships Live a stressful lifestyle  If you are concerned about your drinking, it may help to take a careful look at your  alcohol use . Symptoms 
 
 Doctors have developed a list of symptoms that a person has to have in the past year to be diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. Symptoms may include: Times when you drink more or longer than you planned to Wanted to, or tried to, cut down or stop drinking, but could not Spend a lot of time and effort to get alcohol, use it, or recover from its effects Crave alcohol or have a strong urge to use it Alcohol use is causing you to miss work or school, or you do not perform as well because of drinking Continue to drink, even when relationships with family and friends are being harmed Stop taking part in activities that you used to enjoy While or after drinking, you get into situations that can cause you to get hurt, such as driving, using machinery, or having unsafe sex Keep drinking, even though you know it is making a health problem caused by alcohol worse Need more and more alcohol to feel its effects or to get drunk You get withdrawal symptoms when the effects of alcohol wear off  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will: Examine you Ask about your medical and family history Ask about your alcohol use, and if you have any of the symptoms listed above  Your provider may order tests to check for health problems that are common in people who use alcohol. These tests may include: Blood alcohol level (this shows if you have recently been drinking alcohol. It does not diagnose alcohol use disorder.) Complete blood count Liver function tests Magnesium blood test Treatment 
 
 Many people with an alcohol problem need to completely stop using alcohol. This is called abstinence. Having strong social and family support can help make it easier to quit drinking. Some people are able to just cut back on their drinking. So even if you do not give up alcohol altogether, you may be able to  drink less . This can improve your health and relationships with others. It can also help you perform better at work or school. However, many people who drink too much find they can't just cut back. Abstinence may be the only way to manage a drinking problem.  
 DECIDING TO QUIT 
  Like many people with an alcohol problem, you may not recognize that your drinking has gotten out of  hand. An important first step is to be aware of  how much you drink . It also helps to understand the  health risks of alcohol . If you  decide to quit drinking , talk with your provider. Treatment involves helping you realize how much your alcohol use is harming your life and the lives those around you.  Depending on how much and how long you have been drinking, you may be at risk for alcohol withdrawal. Withdrawal can be very uncomfortable and even life threatening. If you have been drinking a lot, you should cut back or stop drinking only under the care of a doctor. Talk with your provider about how to stop using alcohol.  
 LONG-TERM SUPPORT 
  Alcohol recovery or support programs can help you stop drinking completely. These programs usually offer: Education about alcohol use and its effects Counseling and therapy to discuss how to control your thoughts and behaviors Physical health care  For the best chance of success, you should live with people who support your efforts to avoid alcohol. Some programs offer housing options for people with alcohol problems. Depending on your needs and the programs that are available: You may be treated in a special recovery center (inpatient) You may attend a program while you live at home (outpatient)  You may be prescribed medicines to help you quit. They are often used with long-term counseling or support groups. These medicines make it less likely that you will drink again or help limit the amount you drink. Drinking may mask depression or other mood or anxiety disorders. If you have a mood disorder, it may become more noticeable when you stop drinking. Your provider will treat any mental disorders in addition to your alcohol treatment. Support Groups 
 
 Support groups  help many people who are dealing with alcohol use. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on whether they can successfully cut back or stop drinking.  It may take several tries to stop drinking for good. If you are struggling to quit, do not give up hope. Getting treatment, if needed, along with support and encouragement from support groups and those around you can help you remain sober.  Possible Complications 
 
 Alcohol use disorder can increase your risk of many health problems, including: Bleeding in the digestive tract Brain cell damage A brain disorder called  Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome Cancer of the esophagus, liver, colon, breast and other areas Changes in the menstrual cycle Delirium tremens (DTs) Dementia  and memory loss Depression  and suicide Erectile dysfunction Heart damage High blood pressure Inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) Liver disease, including  cirrhosis Nerve damage Poor nutrition Sleeping problems (insomnia) Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)  Alcohol use also increases your risk for violence. Drinking alcohol while you are pregnant can lead to severe birth defects in the baby. This is called  fetal alcohol syndrome .  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Talk with your provider if you or someone you know may have an alcohol problem. Seek immediate medical care or call your local emergency number (such as 911) if you or someone you know has an alcohol problem and develops severe confusion, seizures, or bleeding. Prevention 
 
 The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism recommends: Women should not drink more than 1 drink per day Men should not drink more than 2 drinks per day Alternative Names 
 
 Alcohol dependence; Alcohol abuse; Problem drinking; Drinking problem; Alcohol addiction; Alcoholism - alcohol use; Substance use - alcohol Images 
 
 
 Liver cirrhosis, CT scan 
 Liver fattening, CT scan 
 Liver with disproportional fattening, CT scan 
 Alcoholism 
 Alcoholism 
 Alcohol and diet 
 Liver anatomy 
 References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. CDC vital signs: alcohol screening and counseling. Updated January 7, 2014.  www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/alcohol-screening-counseling . Accessed March 17, 2016. Moyer VA; Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: U.S. preventive services task force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;159(3):210-218. PMID: 23698791  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23698791 . National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol use disorder.  www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/overview-alcohol-consumption/alcohol-use-disorders . Accessed March 17, 2016. Sherin K, Seikel S, Hale S. Alcohol use disorders. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Acute pancreatitis 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Bleeding esophageal varices 
 Cancer 
 Cirrhosis 
 Depression - overview 
 Liver disease 
 Suicide and suicidal behavior 
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Pancreatitis - discharge 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 8/15/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 Browse the Encyclopedia