
 Alkaptonuria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alkaptonuria is a rare condition in which a person's urine turns a dark brownish-black color when exposed to air. Alkaptonuria is part of a group of conditions known as an  inborn error of metabolism .
 Causes 
 
 A defect in the  HGD  gene causes alkaptonuria. The gene defect makes the body unable to properly break down certain amino acids (tyrosine and phenylalanine). As a result, a substance called homogentisic acid builds up in the skin and other body tissues. The acid leaves the body through the urine. The urine turns brownish-black when it mixes with air. Alkaptonuria is inherited, which means it is passed down through families. If both parents carry a nonworking copy of the gene related to this condition, each of their children has a 25% (1 in 4) chance of developing the disease. Symptoms 
 
 Urine in an infant's diaper may darken and can turn almost black after several hours. However, many people with this condition may not know they have it until mid-adulthood (around age 40), when joint and other problems occur. Symptoms may include: 
Arthritis (especially of the spine) that gets worse over time
   Darkening of the ear Dark spots on the white of the eye and cornea  Exams and Tests 
 
 A urine test is done to test for alkaptonuria. If ferric chloride is added to the urine, it will turn the urine black in people with this condition. Treatment 
 
 Some people benefit from high-dose vitamin C. This has been shown to decrease the buildup of brown pigment in the cartilage and may slow the development of arthritis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is expected to be good. Possible Complications 
 
 People with this condition also can get  arthritis  in adulthood. The build-up of homogentisic acid in the cartilage causes arthritis in about half of older adults with alkaptonuria. Homogentisic acid also can build up on the heart valves, especially the mitral valve. This can sometimes lead to the need for valve replacement. Coronary artery disease  may develop earlier in life in people with alkaptonuria. Kidney stones  and prostate stones may be more common in people with alkaptonuria.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice that your own urine or your child's urine becomes dark brown or black when it is exposed to air. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for people with a family history of alkoptonuria who are considering having children. A blood test can be done to see if you carry the gene for alkaptonuria. Prenatal tests (amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling) can be done to screen a developing baby for this condition if the genetic change has been identified. Alternative Names 
 
 AKU; Alcaptonuria; Homogentisic acid oxidase deficiency; Alcaptonuric ochronosis References 
 
 Chakrapani A, Gissen P, McKiernan P. Disorders of tyrosine metabolism. In: Saudubray J-M, van den Berghe G, Walter JH, eds.  Inborn Metabolic Diseases: Diagnosis and Treatment . 5th ed. New York, NY: Springer; 2012:chap 18. Rezvani I, Melvin JJ. Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 79. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Enzyme 
 Metabolism 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Winston-Salem, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia