
 Alkalosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alkalosis is a condition in which the body fluids have excess base (alkali). This is the opposite of excess acid ( acidosis ). Causes 
 
 The kidneys and lungs maintain the proper balance (proper pH level) of chemicals called acids and bases in the body. Decreased carbon dioxide (an acid) level or increased bicarbonate (a base) level makes the body too alkaline, a condition called alkalosis. There are different types of alkalosis. These are described below.  Respiratory alkalosis  is caused by a low carbon dioxide level in the blood. This can be due to: Fever Being at a high altitude Lack of oxygen Liver disease Lung disease, which causes you to breathe faster ( hyperventilate ) Aspirin poisoning Metabolic alkalosis is caused by too much bicarbonate in the blood. It can also occur due to certain kidney diseases. Hypochloremic alkalosis is caused by an extreme lack or loss of chloride, such as from prolonged vomiting. Hypokalemic alkalosis is caused by the kidneys' response to an extreme lack or loss of potassium. This can occur from taking certain water pills (diuretics). Compensated alkalosis occurs when the body returns the acid-base balance to normal in cases of alkalosis, but bicarbonate and carbon dioxide levels remain abnormal. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of alkalosis can include any of the following: Confusion  (can progress to stupor or coma) Hand tremor Lightheadedness Muscle twitching Nausea, vomiting Numbness or tingling in the face, hands, or feet Prolonged  muscle spasms  (tetany)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Laboratory tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gas analysis Electrolytes test, such as  basic metabolic panel  to confirm alkalosis and show whether it is respiratory or metabolic alkalosis.  Other tests may be needed to determine the cause of the alkalosis. These may include: Urinalysis Urine pH Treatment 
 
 To treat alkalosis, your health care provider needs to first find the underlying cause. For alkalosis caused by hyperventilation, breathing into a paper bag allows you to keep more carbon dioxide in your body, which improves the alkalosis. If your oxygen level is low, you may receive oxygen. Medicines may be needed to correct chemical loss (such as chloride and potassium). Your provider will monitor your  vital signs  (temperature, pulse, rate of breathing, blood pressure). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most cases of alkalosis respond well to treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated or not treated properly, complications may include any of the following: Arrhythmias  (heart beating too fast, too slow, or irregularly)
   Coma Electrolyte  imbalance (such as  low potassium level )  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you become confused, unable to concentrate, or unable to "catch your breath." Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if there is: Loss of consciousness Rapidly worsening symptoms of alkalosis Seizures Severe breathing difficulties Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the cause of the alkalosis. People with healthy kidneys and lungs do not usually have serious alkalosis. Images 
 
 
 Kidneys 
 References 
 
 

Gaw A, Murphy MJ, Srivastava R, Cowan RA, O'Reilly DS. Acid-base disorders. In: Gaw A, Murphy MJ, Srivastava R, Cowan RA, O'Reilly DS, eds.  Clinical Biochemistry: An Illustrated Colour Text.  5th ed. Philadelphia: PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 24. Strayer RJ. Acid-base disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 124. Read More 
 
 Acidosis 
 Arrhythmias 
 Electrolytes 
 Hyperventilation 
 Low potassium level 
 Respiratory alkalosis 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia