
 Alpha fetoprotein 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is a protein produced by the liver and yolk sac of a developing baby during pregnancy. AFP levels go down soon after birth. It is likely that AFP has no normal function in adults. A test can be done to measure the amount of AFP in your blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time, blood is typically  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You do not need to take any special steps to prepare. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your health care provider may order this test to: Screen for problems in the baby during pregnancy. (The test is done as part of a larger set of blood tests called  quadruple screen .) Diagnose certain liver disorders. Screen for and monitor some cancers. Normal Results 
 
 The normal values in males or nonpregnant females is generally less than 40 micrograms/liter. The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Greater than normal levels of AFP may be due to: Cancer  in  testes , ovaries, biliary (liver secretion) tract, stomach, or pancreas Cirrhosis of the liver Liver cancer Malignant teratoma Recovery from hepatitis Problems during pregnancy Alternative Names 
 
 Fetal alpha globulin; AFP Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Alpha fetoprotein - series 
 References 
 
 Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, Bloom SL, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and fetal therapy. In: Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, Bloom SL, et al, eds.  Williams Obstetrics . 23rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2010:chap 13. Pincus MR, Bluth MH, McPherson RA. Diagnosis and management of cancer using serologic tumor markers. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 73. Richards DS, Otano L, et al. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 11. Read More 
 
 Amniocentesis 
 Cancer 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Malignant teratoma of the mediastinum 
 Miscarriage 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Protein in diet 
 Pulmonary atresia 
 Testes 
 Testicular cancer 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Turner syndrome 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver Cancer 
 Neural Tube Defects 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Prenatal Testing 
 Spina Bifida 
 Testicular Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia