
 Alport syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Alport syndrome is an inherited disorder that damages the tiny blood vessels in the kidneys. It also causes hearing loss and eye problems. Causes 
 
 Alport syndrome is an inherited form of kidney inflammation (nephritis). It is caused by a defect (mutation) in a gene for a protein in the connective tissue, called collagen. The disorder is rare. There are 3 genetic types: X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS) -- This is the most common type. The disease is more severe in males than in females. Autosomal recessive Alport syndrome (ARAS) -- Males and females have equally severe disease. Autosomal dominant Alport syndrome (ADAS) -- This is the rarest type. Males and females have equally severe disease. Symptoms 
 
 KIDNEYS With all types of Alport syndrome the kidneys are affected. The tiny blood vessels in the glomeruli of the kidneys are damaged. The glomeruli filter blood to make urine and remove waste products from the blood. At first, there are no symptoms. Over time, as the glomeruli are more and more damaged, kidney function is lost and waste products and fluids build up in the body. The condition can progress to end-stage renal disease ( ESRD ) at an early age, between adolescence and age 40. At this point,  dialysis  or a  kidney transplant  is needed. Symptoms of kidney problems include: Abnormal urine color Blood in the urine (which can be worsened by upper respiratory infections or exercise) Flank pain High blood pressure Swelling throughout the body EARS Over time, Alport syndrome also leads to hearing loss. By the early teens, it is common in males with XLAS, though in females, hearing loss is not as common and happens when they're adults. With ARAS, boys and girls have hearing loss during childhood. With ADAS, it occurs later in life. Hearing loss usually occurs before kidney failure. EYES Alport syndrome also leads to eye problems, including: Abnormal shape of the lens (anterior lenticonus), which can lead to a slow decline in vision as well as  cataracts . Corneal erosion in which there is loss of the outer layer of the covering of the eyeball, leading to pain, itching, or redness of the eye, or blurred vision. Abnormal coloring of the  retina , a condition called dot-and-fleck retinopathy. It doesn't cause vision problems, but can help diagnose Alport syndrome. Macular hole in which there is thinning or a break in the macula. The macula is a part of the retina that makes central vision sharper and more detailed. A macular hole causes blurred or distorted central vision. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. The following tests may be done: BUN  and serum  creatinine Complete blood count Renal biopsy Urinalysis If your provider suspects you have Alport syndrome, you will also likely have vision and hearing tests. Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment include monitoring and controlling the disease and treating the symptoms. Your provider may recommend any of the following: A diet that limits salt, fluids, and potassium Medicines to control high blood pressure Kidney disease is managed by: Taking medicines to slow kidney damage A diet that limits salt, fluids, and protein Hearing loss can be managed with hearing aids. Eye problems are treated as needed. For example, an abnormal lens due to lenticonus or cataracts can be replaced. Genetic counseling may be recommended because the disorder is inherited. Support Groups 
 
 For more information on Alport syndrome, visit the Alport Syndrome Foundation website at  alportsyndrome.org. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Women usually have a normal lifespan with no signs of the disease except for blood in the urine. In rare cases, women have high blood pressure, swelling, and nerve deafness as a complication of pregnancy. In men, deafness, vision problems, and end-stage kidney disease are likely by age 50.  As the kidneys fail, dialysis or a transplant will be needed. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if: You have symptoms of Alport syndrome You have a family history of Alport syndrome and you are planning to have children Your urine output decreases or stops or you see blood in your urine (this may be a symptom of chronic kidney disease) Prevention 
 
 Awareness of risk factors, such as a family history of the disorder, may allow the condition to be detected early. Alternative Names 
 
 Hereditary nephritis; Hematuria - nephropathy - deafness; Hemorrhagic familial nephritis; Hereditary deafness and nephropathy  Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Gregory MC. Alport syndrome and related disorders. In: Gilbert SJ, Weiner DE, eds.  National Kidney Foundation Primer on Kidney Diseases . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43. Kashton CE. Alport and other familial glomerular syndromes. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 48. Read More 
 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hearing loss 
 Renal 
 Sensorineural deafness 
 Urine - bloody  
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hearing Disorders and Deafness 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia