
 Amebiasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amebiasis is an infection of the intestines. It is caused by the parasite  Entamoeba histolytica . Causes 
 
 E. histolytica  can live in the large intestine (colon) without causing damage to the intestine. In some cases, it invades the colon wall, causing  colitis , acute dysentery, or long-term (chronic) diarrhea. The infection can also spread through the bloodstream to the liver. In rare cases, it can spread to the lungs, brain, or other organs. This condition occurs worldwide. It is most common in tropical areas that have crowded living conditions and poor sanitation. Africa, Mexico, parts of South America, and India have major health problems due to this condition. The parasite may spread: Through food or water contaminated with stools Through fertilizer made of human waste From person to person, particularly by contact with the mouth or rectal area of an infected person Risk factors for severe amebiasis include: Alcohol use Cancer Malnutrition Older or younger age Pregnancy Recent travel to a tropical region Use of corticosteroid medicine to suppress the immune system In the United States, amebiasis is most common among those who live in institutions or people who have traveled to an area where amebiasis is common. Symptoms 
 
 Most people with this infection do not have symptoms. If symptoms occur, they are seen 7 to 28 days after being exposed to the parasite. Mild symptoms may include: Abdominal cramps Diarrhea: passage of 3 to 8 semiformed stools per day, or passage of soft stools with mucus and occasional blood
    Fatigue Excessive gas Rectal pain while having a bowel movement ( tenesmus ) Unintentional weight loss Severe symptoms may include: Abdominal tenderness Bloody stools , including passage of liquid stools with streaks of blood, passage of 10 to 20 stools per day
    Fever Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. You will be asked about your medical history, especially if you have recently traveled overseas.  Examination of the abdomen may show  liver enlargement  or tenderness in the abdomen. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood test for amebiasis Examination of the inside of the lower large bowel ( sigmoidoscopy ) Stool test Microscope examination of stool samples , usually with multiple samples over several days Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on how severe the infection is. Usually, antibiotics are prescribed. If you are vomiting, you may be given medicines through a vein ( intravenously ) until you can take them by mouth. Medicines to stop diarrhea are usually not prescribed, because they can make the condition worse. After antibiotic treatment, your stool will likely be rechecked to make sure the infection has been cleared. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome is usually good with treatment. Usually, the illness lasts about 2 weeks, but it can come back if you do not get treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of amebiasis may include: Liver abscess Medicine side effects, including nausea Spread of the parasite through the blood to the liver, lungs, brain, or other organs When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have diarrhea that does not go away or gets worse. Prevention 
 
 When traveling in countries where sanitation is poor, drink purified or boiled water. Do not eat uncooked vegetables or unpeeled fruit. Alternative Names 
 
 Amebic dysentery; Intestinal amebiasis; Amebic colitis; Diarrhea - amebiasis Images 
 
 
 Amebic brain abscess 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Petri WA, Haque R. Entamoeba species, including amebic colitis and liver abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 274. Petri WA, Lima AAM. Amebiasis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 352. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Colitis 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Pyogenic liver abscess 
 Tenesmus 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foodborne Illness 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia