
 Amebic liver abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amebic liver abscess is a collection of pus in the liver in response to an intestinal parasite called  Entamoeba histolytica . Causes 
 
 Amebic liver abscess is caused by  Entamoeba histolytica.  This parasite causes  amebiasis , an intestinal infection that is also called amebic dysentery. After an infection has occurred, the parasite may be carried by the blood from the intestines to the liver. The disease spreads from eating food or water that has been contaminated with feces (sometimes due to the use of human waste as fertilizer). It is also spread through person-to-person contact. The infection occurs worldwide, but is most common in tropical areas where crowded living conditions and poor sanitation exist. Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia, and India have significant health problems from this disease. Risk factors for amebic liver abscess include: Alcoholism Cancer Immunosuppression , including HIV infection Malnutrition Old age Pregnancy Recent travel to a tropical region Steroid use Symptoms 
 
 There are usually no symptoms of intestinal infection. But people with amebic liver abscess do have symptoms, including:  Abdominal pain, particularly in the right, upper part of the abdomen; pain is intense, continuous or stabbing
  Cough Fever and chills Diarrhea (in only one-third of patients) General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Hiccups that do not stop (rare) Jaundice Loss of appetite Sweating Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan  or MRI Complete blood count Liver abscess aspiration to check for bacterial infection in the liver abscess Liver scan Liver function tests Blood test for amebiasis Stool testing  for amebiasis Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics such as metronidazole (Flagyl) or tinidazole (Tindamax) are the usual treatment for liver abscess. A drug such as paromomycin or diloxanide must also be taken to get rid of all the ameba in the intestine and to prevent the disease from coming back. This treatment can usually wait until after the abscess has been treated. In rare cases, the abscess may need to be drained using a catheter or surgery to relieve some of the abdominal pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, the abscess may break open (rupture) and spread into other organs, leading to death. People who are treated have a very high chance of a complete cure or only minor complications. Possible Complications 
 
 The abscess may rupture into the abdominal cavity, the lining of the lungs, the lungs, or the sac around the heart. The infection can also spread to the brain. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disease, especially if you have recently traveled to an area where the disease is known to occur. Prevention 
 
 When traveling in tropical countries with poor sanitation, drink purified water and do not eat uncooked vegetables or unpeeled fruit. Alternative Names 
 
 Hepatic amebiasis; Extraintestinal amebiasis; Abscess - amebic liver Images 
 
 
 Liver cell death 
 References 
 
 Petri WA, Haque R. Entamoeba species, including amebic colitis and liver abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 275. Wolf PS, Park JO. Liver abscess: pyogenic and amebic hepatic abscess. In: Jong EC, ed.  Netter's Infectious Diseases . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 47. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Amebiasis 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Pyogenic liver abscess 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Liver Diseases 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia