
 Aminophylline overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aminophylline and theophylline are medicines used to treat lung diseases such as asthma. They help prevent and treat wheezing and other breathing problems. Aminophylline or theophylline  overdose  occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of these medicines. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Aminophylline and theophylline can be poisonous in large doses. Where Found 
 
 Aminophylline and theophylline are found in medicines with these names (with brand names in parentheses): Aminophylline Theophylline (Theo-Dur, Slo-Phyllin, Theolair, Slo-Bid) Various  asthma  medicines Other products may also contain aminophylline and theophylline. Symptoms 
 
 The most serious life-threatening symptoms of theophylline overdose are seizures and disturbances in heart rhythm. Symptoms in adults may include: STOMACH AND INTESTINES Increased appetite Increased thirst Nausea Vomiting (possibly with blood) HEART AND BLOOD High or low blood pressure Irregular heartbeat Rapid heart rate Pounding heartbeat (palpitations)  LUNGS Breathing difficulty MUSCLES AND JOINTS Muscle twitching and cramping NERVOUS SYSTEM Confusion Convulsions Dizziness Fever Hallucinations (thinking something is there, but it's not) Headache Irritability Confused thinking, poor judgment and agitation (psychosis) Restlessness Sweating Trouble sleeping  Symptoms in babies may include: STOMACH AND INTESTINES Nausea Vomiting HEART AND BLOOD Irregular heartbeat Low blood pressure Rapid heartbeat Shock LUNGS Rapid, deep breathing MUSCLES AND JOINTS Muscle cramps Twitching  NERVOUS SYSTEM Convulsions Irritability Tremors  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready:  Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the medicine (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.  The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray Dialysis (kidney machine), in severe cases EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Shock to the heart, for serious heart rhythm disturbances Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Convulsions and irregular heartbeats may be difficult to control. Some symptoms may occur up to 12 hours after the overdose. Death may occur with large overdoses, especially in very young or old people. Alternative Names 
 
 Theophylline overdose; Xanthine overdose References 
 
 Olsen KM. Theophylline and other methylxanthines. In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 181. Shannon MW. Theophylline and caffeine. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 65. Swadron SP, Gruber PF. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 74. 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia