
 Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amitriptyline hydrochloride is a type of prescription medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant. It is used to treat depression. Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Amitriptyline can be harmful in large amounts.  Where Found 
 
 Amitriptyline hydrochloride is a prescription medicine. It is sold under these brand names: 
Adepril
   Amitid Amitril Elavil Emitrip Endep Enovil Trepiline Tryptanol Vanatrip  Other medicines may also contain amitriptyline hydrochloride. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of an amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Slowed, labored breathing BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Cannot urinate Urine flow is weak and does not start easily EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Dry mouth Enlarged pupils  HEART AND BLOOD Low blood pressure Irregular heart rate Shock NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Coma  (sudden onset) Convulsions  (sudden onset) Drowsiness Hallucinations Headache Inability to concentrate Lack of alertness ( stupor ) Muscle rigidity Restlessness Seizures Uncoordinated movement STOMACH AND INTESTINES Constipation Increased appetite Weight gain Vomiting Home Care 
 
 This can be a very serious overdose. Seek medical help right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready:  Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.  The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Laxative Medicine called an antidote to reverse the effects of the poison and treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 An amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose can be very serious. People who swallow too much of this drug are almost always admitted to the hospital. How well someone does depends on how much of the drug they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance of recovery. Complications such as pneumonia, muscle damage from lying on a hard surface for a long period of time, or brain damage from lack of oxygen may result in permanent disability. Death can occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Elavil overdose; Adepril overdose; Endep overdose; Enovil overdose; Trepiline overdose References 
 
 Kirk MA, Baer AB. Anticholinergics and antihistamines. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 39. Pryor KO, Storer KP. Drugs for neuropsychiatric disorders. In: Hemmings HC, Egan TD, eds.  Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia: Foundations and Clinical Applications . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 11. Velez LI, Feng S-Y. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 150. Woolf AD, Erdman AR, Nelson LS, et al. American Association of Poison Control Centers. Tricyclic antidepressant poisoning: an evidence-based consensus guideline for out-of-hospital management.  Clin Toxicol . 2007;45(3):203-33. PMID: 17453872  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17453872 . 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Antidepressants 
 Browse the Encyclopedia