
 Ammonium hydroxide poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ammonium hydroxide is a colorless liquid chemical solution. It forms when ammonia dissolves in water. This article discusses poisoning from ammonium hydroxide. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Ammonium hydroxide is poisonous. Where Found 
 
 Ammonium hydroxide is found in many industrial products and cleaners. Some of these are flooring strippers, brick cleaners, and cements. Ammonium hydroxide can also release ammonia gas into the air. Ammonia alone (not ammonium hydroxide) can be found in many household items such as detergents, stain removers, bleaches, and dyes. The symptoms and treatment for ammonia exposure are similar to those for ammonium hydroxide. Other products may also contain ammonium hydroxide and ammonia. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of ammonia poisoning in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Breathing difficulty (if the ammonia is inhaled) Coughing Throat swelling (can also cause breathing difficulty) Wheezing EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue Vision loss ESOPHAGUS, STOMACH, AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns of the esophagus (food pipe) and stomach Severe abdominal pain Vomiting, possibly with blood HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure (develops rapidly) Severe change in pH (too much or too little acid in the blood, which leads to damage in all of the body organs) SKIN Burns Holes in skin tissue  Irritation Home Care 
 
 Do NOT make the person throw up. If ammonium hydroxide is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed ammonium hydroxide, give them milk or water right away. You may also give them fruit juice. But, DO NOT give anything to drink if they have symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in fumes, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was inhaled, swallowed, or touched the skin The amount inhaled, swallowed, or on the skin Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.  The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Bronchoscopy  -- camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray EKG (heart tracing) Endoscopy  -- camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach Fluids through the vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin Washing of the skin (irrigation), sometimes every few hours for several days  Some people may need to stay in the hospital overnight. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Survival past 48 hours usually means the person will recover. If the  chemical burned  their eye, permanent blindness will probably occur in that eye. How well a person does depends on the strength of the chemical and how fast it was diluted and neutralized. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, eyes, lungs, esophagus, nose, and stomach are possible. The ultimate outcome depends on how severe the damage is. If the chemical was swallowed, damage to the esophagus and stomach continues to occur for several weeks, and death may occur weeks or months later. Alternative Names 
 
 Aqueous - ammonia References 
 
 Belson M. Ammonia and Nitrogen Oxides. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 97. Harchelroad FP Jr, Rottinghaus DM. Chemical burns. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 200. Kleinschmidt K, Schwarz E. Toxic inhalants. In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 187. Wax PM, Yarema M. Corrosives. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 98. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia