
 Amniocentesis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Amniocentesis is a test that can be done during pregnancy to look for these problems in the developing baby: Birth defects Genetic problems Infection Lung development  How the Test is Performed 
 
 Amniocentesis removes a small amount of fluid from the sac around the baby in the womb (uterus). It is most often done in a doctor's office or medical center. You do not need to stay in the hospital. You will have a  pregnancy ultrasound  first. This helps your health care provider see where the baby is in your womb. Numbing medicine is then rubbed onto part of your belly. Sometimes, the medicine is given through a shot in the skin on the belly area. Your health care provider inserts a long, thin needle through your belly and into your womb. A small amount of fluid (about 4 teaspoons or 20 milliliters) is removed from the sac surrounding the baby. The fluid is sent to a laboratory. Testing may include: Genetic studies Measurement of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels (a substance produced in the liver of the developing baby) Culture for infection  Results of genetic testing usually take about 2 weeks. Other test results come back in 1 to 3 days.  Sometimes amniocentesis is also used later in pregnancy to: Diagnose infection Check whether the baby's lungs are developed and ready for delivery Remove excess fluid from around the baby if there is too much amniotic fluid ( polyhydramnios ) How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your bladder must be full for the ultrasound. Before the test, blood may be taken to find out your  blood type  and Rh factor. You may get a shot of medicine called Rho(D) Immune Globulin (RhoGAM and other brands) if you are Rh negative. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Amniocentesis is usually offered to women who are at increased risk of having a child with birth defects. This includes women who: Will be 35 or older when they give birth Had a screening test that shows there may be a birth defect or other problem Have had babies with birth defects in other pregnancies Have a family history of genetic disorders  Genetic counseling is recommended before the procedure. This will allow you to: Learn about other prenatal tests Make an informed decision about options for prenatal diagnosis  This test: Is a diagnostic test, not a screening test Is greater than 99% accurate for diagnosing Down syndrome Is most often done between 15 and 20 weeks Amniocentesis can be used to diagnose many different gene and chromosome problems in the baby, including: Anencephaly  (when the baby is missing a large portion of the brain) Down syndrome Rare metabolic disorders that are passed down through families Other genetic problems, like trisomy 18  Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means: No genetic or chromosome problems were found in your baby. Bilirubin and alpha-fetoprotein levels appear normal.  Note: Even with normal amniocentesis results, a baby may still have genetic or other types of birth defects. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result may mean your baby has: A gene or chromosome problem, such as  Down syndrome   Birth defects that involve the spine or brain, such as  spina bifida Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. Ask your provider: How the condition or defect may be treated during or after your pregnancy What special needs your child may have after birth What other options you have about maintaining or ending your pregnancy  Risks 
 
 Risks are minimal, but may include: Infection or injury to the baby Miscarriage Leaking of amniotic fluid Vaginal bleeding Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - amniotic fluid; Culture - amniotic cells; Alpha-fetoprotein - amniocentesis Images 
 
 
 Amniocentesis 
 Amniocentesis 
 Amniocentesis - series 
 References 
 
 Simpson JL, Holzgreve W, Driscoll DA. Genetic counseling and genetic screening. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2012:chap 10.  Simpson JL, Richards DA, Otao L, Driscoll DA. Prenatal genetic diagnosis. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2012:chap 11.  Read More 
 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Rh incompatibility 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Prenatal Testing 
 Browse the Encyclopedia