
 Amylase - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This is a test that measures the amount of amylase in urine. Amylase is an  enzyme  that helps digest carbohydrates. It is produced mainly in the pancreas and the glands that make saliva. Amylase may also be  measured with a blood test . How the Test is Performed 
 
 A urine sample is needed. The test may be performed using: Clean-catch urine test 24-hour urine collection How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Many medicines can interfere with test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination. There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to diagnose pancreatitis and other diseases that affect the pancreas. Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is 2.6 to 21.2 international units per hour (IU/h). Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The example above shows the common measurement range for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An increased amount of amylase in the urine is called amylasuria. Increased urine amylase levels may be a sign of: Acute pancreatitis Alcohol consumption Cancer of the pancreas , ovaries, or lungs Cholecystitis Ectopic or ruptured  tubal pregnancy Gallbladder disease Infection of the salivary glands (called sialoadenitis, may be caused by  mumps  or a blockage) Intestinal obstruction Pancreatic duct obstruction Pelvic inflammatory disease Perforated ulcer Decreased amylase levels may be due to: Damage to the pancreas Kidney disease Pancreatic cancer Toxemia of pregnancy Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Amylase urine test 
 References 
 
 Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Read More 
 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Acute pancreatitis 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Bile duct obstruction 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Enzyme 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Mumps 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Preeclampsia 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Intestinal Obstruction 
 Kidney Tests 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Pancreatitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia