
 Anaphylaxis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening type of  allergic reaction . Causes 
 
 Anaphylaxis is a severe, whole-body allergic reaction to a chemical that has become an  allergen . An allergen is a substance that can cause an allergic reaction.  After being exposed to a substance such as bee sting venom, the person's immune system becomes sensitized to it. When the person is exposed to that allergen again, an allergic reaction may occur. Anaphylaxis happens quickly after the exposure. The condition is severe and involves the whole body. Tissues in different parts of the body release histamine and other substances. This causes the airways to tighten and leads to other symptoms. Some drugs (morphine, x-ray dye, aspirin, and others) may cause an anaphylactic-like reaction (anaphylactoid reaction) when people are first exposed to them. These reactions are not the same as the immune system response that occurs with true anaphylaxis. But, the symptoms, risk of complications, and treatment are the same for both types of reactions. Anaphylaxis can occur in response to any allergen. Common causes include: Drug allergies Food allergies Insect bites/stings Pollen and other inhaled allergens rarely cause anaphylaxis. Some people have an anaphylactic reaction with no known cause. Anaphylaxis is life-threatening and can occur at any time. Risks include a history of any type of allergic reaction. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms develop quickly, often within seconds or minutes. They may include any of the following: Abdominal pain Feeling anxious Chest discomfort or tightness Diarrhea Difficulty breathing, coughing, wheezing, or high-pitched breathing sounds Difficulty swallowing Dizziness  or  lightheadedness Hives , itchiness, redness of the skin Nasal congestion Nausea or vomiting Palpitations Slurred speech Swelling of the face, eyes, or tongue Unconsciousness Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the person and ask about what might have caused the condition. Tests for the allergen that caused anaphylaxis (if the cause is not obvious) may be done after treatment. Treatment 
 
 Anaphylaxis is an emergency condition that needs medical attention right away. Call 911 immediately. Check the person's airway, breathing, and circulation, which are known as the ABC's of Basic Life Support. A warning sign of dangerous throat swelling is a very hoarse or whispered voice, or coarse sounds when the person is breathing in air. If necessary, begin rescue breathing and  CPR . Call 911. Calm and reassure the person. If the allergic reaction is from a bee sting, scrape the stinger off the skin with something firm (such as a fingernail or plastic credit card). Do not use tweezers. Squeezing the stinger will release more venom. If the person has emergency allergy medicine on hand, help the person take or inject it. Do not give medicine through the mouth if the person is having difficulty breathing. Take steps to prevent  shock . Have the person lie flat, raise the person's feet about 12 inches (30 centimeters), and cover the person with a coat or blanket. Do not place the person in this position if a head, neck, back, or leg injury is suspected, or if it causes discomfort.  DO NOT: Do not assume that any allergy shots the person has already received will provide complete protection. Do not place a pillow under the person's head if they are having trouble breathing. This can block the airways. Do not give the person anything by mouth if they are having trouble breathing.  Paramedics or other providers may  place a tube through the nose or mouth  into the airways. Or emergency surgery will be done to  place a tube directly into the trachea . The person may receive medicines to further reduce symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening without prompt treatment. Symptoms usually do get better with the right therapy, so it is important to act right away. Possible Complications 
 
 Without prompt treatment, anaphylaxis may result in: Blocked airway Cardiac arrest  (no effective heartbeat) Respiratory arrest  (no breathing) Shock When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 if you or someone you know develops severe symptoms of anaphylaxis. Or, go to the nearest emergency room. Prevention 
 
 To prevent allergic reactions and anaphylaxis: Avoid triggers such as foods and medicines that have caused an allergic reaction in the past. Ask detailed questions about ingredients when you are eating away from home. Also carefully examine ingredient labels. If you have a child who is allergic to certain foods, introduce one new food at a time in small amounts so you can recognize an allergic reaction. People who know that they have had serious allergic reactions should wear a medical ID tag. If you have a history of serious allergic reactions, carry emergency medicines (such as a chewable antihistamine and injectable epinephrine or a bee sting kit) according to your provider's instructions. Do not use your injectable epinephrine on anyone else. They may have a condition (such as a heart problem) that could be worsened by this drug. Alternative Names 
 
 Anaphylactic reaction; Anaphylactic shock; Shock - anaphylactic; Allergic reaction - anaphylaxis Images 
 
 
 Shock 
 Allergic reactions 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Hives 
 Food allergies 
 Insect stings and allergy 
 Allergic reactions to medication 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Brown SGA, Kemp SF, Lieberman PL. Anaphylaxis. In: Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 77. Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Randolph C, et al. Anaphylaxis – a practice parameter update 2015.  Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol . 2015;115(5):341-384. PMID: 26505932  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26505932 . Schwartz LB. Systemic anaphylaxis, food allergy, and insect sting allergy. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 253. Tran TP, Muelleman RL. Allergy, hypersensitivity, angioedema, and anaphylaxis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 119. Read More 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Angioedema 
 Arrhythmias 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Drug allergies 
 Food allergy 
 Hives 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Shock 
 Wheezing 
 
 Review Date 3/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Stuart I. Henochowicz, MD, FACP, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Drug Reactions 
 Food Allergy 
 Insect Bites and Stings 
 Shock 
 Browse the Encyclopedia