
 Anaplastic thyroid cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a rare and aggressive form of cancer of the thyroid gland. Causes 
 
 Anaplastic thyroid cancer is an invasive type of  thyroid cancer  that grows very rapidly. It occurs most often in people over age 60. The cause is unknown. Anaplastic cancer accounts for only about 1% of all thyroid cancers. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Cough Coughing up blood Difficulty swallowing Hoarseness or changing voice Loud breathing Lower neck lump, which often grows quickly  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam almost always shows a growth in the neck region. An MRI or CT scan of the neck may show a tumor growing from the thyroid gland. A thyroid biopsy makes the diagnosis. An examination of the airway with a fiberoptic scope ( laryngoscopy ) may show a paralyzed vocal cord. A  thyroid scan  shows this growth to be "cold," meaning it does not absorb a radioactive substance.  Thyroid function blood tests are normal in most cases. Treatment 
 
 This type of cancer cannot be cured by surgery. Complete removal of the thyroid gland does not prolong the lives of people who have this type of cancer. Of other treatment options, only radiation therapy combined with chemotherapy has a significant benefit. Surgery to place a tube in the throat to help with breathing (tracheostomy) or in the stomach to help with eating (gastrostomy) may be needed during treatment. For some people, enrolling in a clinical trial of new thyroid cancer treatments may be an option. Support Groups 
 
 You can often ease the stress of illness by joining a support group of people sharing common experiences and problems.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook with this disease is poor. Most people do not survive longer than 6 months because the disease is aggressive and there is a lack of effective treatment options. Possible Complications 
 
  Complications may include: Spread of tumor within the neck
   Metastasis  (spread) of cancer to other body tissues or organs When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if there is a persistent lump or mass in the neck, hoarseness, changing voice, cough, or coughing up blood. Alternative Names 
 
 Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid Images 
 
 
 Thyroid cancer - CT scan 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Kim M, Ladenson P. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 226. Lai SY, Mandel SJ, Weber RS. Management of thyroid neoplasms. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 123. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN guidelines in oncology: thyroid carcinoma.Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/thyroid.pdf . Accessed April 6, 2016. Read More 
 
 Metastasis 
 Thyroid cancer 
 Thyroid function tests 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia