
 Anemia of chronic disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anemia  is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. There are many types of anemia. Anemia of chronic disease (ACD) is anemia that is found in people with certain long-term (chronic) medical conditions that involve inflammation. Causes 
 
 Anemia is a lower-than-normal number of red blood cells in the blood. ACD is a common cause of anemia. Some conditions that can lead to ACD include: Autoimmune disorders , such as  Crohn disease ,  systemic lupus erythematosus ,  rheumatoid arthritis , and  ulcerative colitis Cancer , including lymphoma and  Hodgkin disease Long-term infections, such as bacterial endocarditis,  osteomyelitis  (bone infection),  HIV/AIDS ,  hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C Symptoms 
 
 Anemia of chronic disease is often mild. You may not notice any symptoms. When symptoms occur, they may include: Feeling weak or tired Headache Paleness Shortness of breath  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam.  Anemia may be the first symptom of a serious illness, so finding its cause is very important.  Tests that may be done to diagnose anemia or rule out other causes include: Hemoglobin level Red blood count Reticulocyte count Serum ferritin level Serum iron level Other blood tests  Treatment 
 
 Anemia is often mild enough that it does not need treatment. It will likely get better when the disease that is causing it is treated. The condition is rarely severe enough to need a blood transfusion. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The anemia will improve when the disease that is causing it is treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Discomfort from symptoms is the main complication in most cases. Anemia may lead to a higher risk for death in people with heart failure. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a long-term (chronic) disorder and you develop symptoms of anemia. Alternative Names 
 
 Anemia of inflammation; Inflammatory anemia; AOCD; ACD Images 
 
 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Inflammatory anemia. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:703-704. Little JA, Benz EJ Jr, Gardner LB. Anemia of chronic diseases. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 35. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Chronic 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Crohn disease 
 Erythropoietin test 
 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Rheumatic fever 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia