
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An aneurysm is a weak area in the wall of a blood vessel that causes the blood vessel to bulge or balloon out. When an aneurysm occurs in a blood vessel of the brain, it is called a cerebral, or intracranial, aneurysm. Causes 
 
 Aneurysms  in the brain occur when there is a weakened area in the wall of a blood vessel. An aneurysm may be present from birth (congenital). Or, it may develop later in life, such as after a blood vessel is injured. There are many types of brain aneurysms. The most common type is called a berry aneurysm. This type can vary in size from a few millimeters to over a centimeter. Giant berry aneurysms can be bigger than 2.5 centimeters. These are more common in adults. Berry aneurysms are passed down through families more often than other types of aneurysms. Watch this video about: Cerebral aneurysm Other types of cerebral aneurysms involve widening of an entire blood vessel. Or, they may appear as a ballooning out of part of a blood vessel. Such aneurysms can occur in any blood vessel that supplies the brain. Hardening of arteries ( atherosclerosis ), trauma, and infection can all injure the blood vessel wall and cause cerebral aneurysms. About 5% of people have a brain aneurysm, but only a small number of these aneurysms cause symptoms or rupture.  Risk factors include:  Family history of cerebral aneurysms Medical problems such as  polycystic kidney disease ,  coarctation of the aorta , and  endocarditis High blood pressure, smoking, alcohol, and illegal drug use  Symptoms 
 
 A person may have an aneurysm without having any symptoms. This kind of aneurysm may be found when an MRI or CT scan of the brain is done for another reason. A brain aneurysm may begin to leak a small amount of blood. This may cause a severe  headache  that a person may describe as "the worst headache of my life." It may be called a thunderclap or sentinel headache. This means the headache could be a warning sign of a future rupture that may occur days to weeks after the headache first started. Symptoms may also occur if the aneurysm pushes on nearby structures in the brain or breaks open (ruptures) and causes bleeding into the brain. Symptoms depend on the location of the aneurysm, whether it breaks open, and what part of the brain it is pushing on. Symptoms may include: Double vision Loss of vision Headaches Eye pain Neck pain Stiff neck Ringing in the ears A sudden, severe headache is one symptom of an aneurysm that has ruptured. Other symptoms of an aneurysm rupture may include: Confusion,  no energy ,  sleepiness , or  stupor Eyelid drooping Headaches with nausea or vomiting Muscle weakness  or difficulty moving any part of the body Numbness  or  decreased sensation  in any part of the body Problems speaking Seizures Stiff neck (occasionally) Vision changes (double vision, loss of vision)  NOTE: A ruptured aneurysm is a medical emergency. Call your local emergency number, such as 911. Exams and Tests 
 
 An eye exam may show signs of increased pressure in the brain, including swelling of the optic nerve or bleeding into the retina of the eye. A brain and nervous system exam may show abnormal eye movement, speech, strength, or sensation. The following tests may be used to diagnose a cerebral aneurysm and determine the cause of bleeding in the brain: Cerebral angiography  or spiral CT scan angiography of the head to show the location and size of the aneurysm Spinal tap  CT scan of the head EEG MRI of the head  or MRI angiogram  Treatment 
 
 Two common methods are used to  repair an aneurysm  that has not yet ruptured: Clipping is done during open  brain surgery (craniotomy) . Endovascular repair is most often done. It usually involves a coil or coiling. This is a less invasive way to treat some aneurysms. Not all aneurysms need to be treated right away. Those that are very small (less than 3 mm) are less likely to break open. Your provider will help you decide whether or not it is safer to have surgery to block off the aneurysm before it can break open. Sometimes people are too ill to have surgery, or it may be too dangerous to treat the aneurysm because of its location. A ruptured aneurysm is an emergency that needs to be treated right away. Treatment may involve: Being admitted to the hospital's intensive care unit (ICU) Complete bed rest and activity restrictions Drainage of blood from the brain area (cerebral ventricular drainage) Drugs to prevent seizures Drugs to control headaches and blood pressure Drugs through a vein (IV) to prevent infection Once the aneurysm is repaired, treatment may be needed to prevent a stroke from a blood vessel spasm. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on many things. People who are in a deep coma after an aneurysm rupture do not do as well as those with less severe symptoms. Ruptured cerebral aneurysms are often deadly. Of those who survive, very few have some sort of permanent disability. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of aneurysm in the brain may include: Increased pressure inside the skull Loss of movement in one or more parts of the body Loss of sensation of any part of the face or body Seizures Stroke Subarachnoid hemorrhage When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a sudden or severe headache, especially if you also have nausea, vomiting, seizures, or any other nervous system symptom. Also call if you have a headache that is unusual for you, especially if it is severe or your worst headache ever. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent a berry aneurysm from forming. Treating  high blood pressure  may reduce the chance that an existing aneurysm will rupture. Controlling risk factors for atherosclerosis may reduce the likelihood of some types of aneurysms.  People who are known to have an aneurysm may need regular doctor visits to make sure the aneurysm is not changing size or shape. If unruptured aneurysms are discovered in time, they can be treated before causing problems. The decision to repair an unruptured cerebral aneurysm is based on the size and location of the aneurysm, and the person's age and general health.  Alternative Names 
 
 Aneurysm - cerebral; Cerebral aneurysm; Aneurysm - intracranial Images 
 
 
 Cerebral aneurysm 
 Cerebral aneurysm 
 References 
 
 Bowles E. Cerebral aneurysm and aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Nursing Standard . 2014;28(34):52-59.  journals.rcni.com/doi/pdfplus/10.7748/ns2014.04.28.34.52.e8694 . Accessed July 19, 2016. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Cerebral aneurysm fact sheet. Updated May 26, 2016.  www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/cerebral_aneurysm/detail_cerebral_aneurysms.htm . Accessed July 19, 2016. Szeder V, Tateshima S, Duckwiler GR. Intracranial aneurysms and subarachnoid hemorrhage. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 67. Thompson BG, Brown RD, Amin-Hanjani S, et al. Guidelines for the management of patients with unruptured intracranial aneurysms: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.  Stroke . 2015:46(8):2368-2400. PMID: 26089327  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26089327 . Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Brain aneurysm repair 
 Brain surgery 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Endovascular embolization 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Incidence 
 Muscle function loss 
 Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain aneurysm repair - discharge 
 Headache - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Aneurysm 
 Browse the Encyclopedia