
 Angelman syndrome  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Angelman syndrome (AS) is a genetic condition that causes problems with the way a child's body and brain develop. The syndrome is present from birth (congenital). However, it often isn't diagnosed until about 6 to 12 months of age. This is when development problems are first noticed in most cases. Causes 
 
 This condition involves the gene  UBE3A .  Most genes come in pairs. Children one from each parent. In most cases, both genes are active. This means information from both genes is used by the cells. With the  UBE3A  gene, both parents pass it on, but only the gene passed on from the mother is active.  Angelman syndrome most often occurs because  UBE3A  passed on from the mother doesn't work the way it should. In some cases, AS is caused when two copies of  UBE3A  gene come from the father, and none come from the mother. This means neither gene is active, because they both come from the father. Symptoms 
 
 In newborns and infants: Loss of muscle tone (floppiness) Trouble feeding Heartburn (acid reflux) Trembling arm and leg movements In toddlers and older children: Unstable or jerky walking Little or no speech Happy, excitable personality Laughing and smiling often Light hair, skin, and eye color compared to rest of family Small head size compared to body, flattened back of head Severe intellectual disability Seizures Excessive movement of the hands and limbs Sleep problems Tongue thrusting, drooling  Unusual chewing and mouthing movements Crossed eyes Walking with arms uplifted and hands waving Most children with this disorder don't show symptoms until about 6 to 12 months. This is when parents may notice a delay in their child's development, such as not crawling or starting to talk. Children between two and five years of age start to show symptoms such as jerky walking, happy personality, laughing often, no speech, and intellectual problems. Exams and Tests 
 
 Genetic tests may diagnose Angelman syndrome. These tests look for: Missing pieces of chromosomes DNA test to see if copies of the gene from both parents are in an inactive or active state Gene mutation in the mother's copy of the gene Other tests may include: Brain MRI EEG Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for Angelman syndrome. Treatment helps to manage health and development problems caused by the condition. Anticonvulsant medicines help control seizures Behavior therapy helps manage hyperactivity, sleep problems, and development problems Occupational and speech therapy manage speech problems and teach living skills Physical therapy helps with walking and movement problems Support Groups 
 
 Angelman Syndrome Foundation:  www.angelman.org ASSERT:  www.angelmanuk.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with AS live close to a normal lifespan. Many have friendships and interact socially. Treatment helps improve function. People with AS can't live on their own. However, they may be able to learn certain tasks and live with others in a supervised group home. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Severe seizures Gastroesophageal reflux (heartburn) Scoliosis (curved spine) Accidental injury due to uncontrolled movements  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has symptoms of this condition. Prevention 
 
 There is no way to prevent Angelman syndrome. If you have a child with AS or a family history of the condition, you may want to talk with your health care provider before becoming pregnant. References 
 
 Dagli AI, Mueller J, Williams CA. Angelman syndrome.  GeneReviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2015:5. PMID: 20301323  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301323 .
Accessed August 1, 2015.  
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Developmental Disabilities 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia