
 Angiodysplasia of the colon 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Angiodysplasia of the colon is swollen, fragile blood vessels in the colon. This can result in blood loss from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Causes 
 
 Angiodysplasia of the colon is mostly related to the aging and break down of the blood vessels. It is more common in older adults. It is almost always seen on the right side of the colon. Most likely, the problem develops out of normal spasms of the colon that cause the blood vessels in the area to enlarge. When this swelling becomes severe, a tiny passageway develops between a small artery and vein. This is called an arteriovenous malformation. Bleeding can occur from this area in the colon wall.  Rarely, angiodysplasia of the colon is related to other diseases of the blood vessels. One of these is Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome. The condition is not related to cancer. It is also different than diverticulosis, which is a more common cause of intestinal bleeding in older adults. Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms vary. Older people may have symptoms such as: Weakness Fatigue Shortness of breath due to anemia  They may not have bleeding directly from the colon.  Other people may have bouts of mild or severe bleeding in which bright red or black blood comes from the rectum. There is no pain associated with angiodysplasia. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done to diagnose this condition include: Angiography  (only useful if there is active bleeding into the colon) Complete blood count (CBC) to check for anemia Colonoscopy Stool test for occult (hidden) blood (a positive test result suggests bleeding from the colon)  Treatment 
 
 It is important to find the cause of bleeding in the colon and how fast the blood is being lost. You may need to be admitted to a hospital. Fluids may be given through a vein, and blood products may be required. Other treatment may be needed once the source of bleeding is found. In most cases, the bleeding stops on its own without treatment.  If treatment is needed, it may involve: 
Angiography to help block the blood vessel that is bleeding or to deliver medicine to help cause the blood vessels to tighten to stop the bleeding
   
Burning (cauterizing) the site of the bleed with heat or a laser using a colonoscope
   In some cases, surgery is the only option. You may need the entire right side of the colon (right hemicolectomy) removed if heavy bleeding continues even after other treatments have been tried. Medicines (thalidomide and estrogens) may be used to help control the disease in some people.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who have bleeding related to this condition despite having had colonoscopy, angiography, or surgery are likely to have more bleeding in the future. The outlook remains good if the bleeding is controlled. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Anemia Death from excessive blood loss Side effects from treatment Severe loss of blood from the GI tract  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health provider if rectal bleeding occurs. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Vascular ectasia of the colon; Colonic arteriovenous malformation Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Brandt LJ, Landis CS. Vascular lesions of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 36. Hauser S. Vascular diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 145. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia