
 Angioplasty and stent placement - carotid artery 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The blood vessels that bring blood to your brain and face are called the carotid arteries. You have a carotid artery on each side of your neck.  The blood flow in this artery can become partly or totally blocked by fatty material called plaque. A partial blockage is called carotid artery stenosis (narrowing). A blockage in your carotid artery can reduce the blood supply to your brain. Sometimes part of a plaque can break off and block off another artery. A stroke can occur if your brain does not get enough blood. Two procedures can be used to treat a carotid artery that is narrowed or blocked. These are: Surgery to remove plaque buildup ( endarterectomy ) Carotid angioplasty with stent placement  Description 
 
 Carotid angioplasty and stenting (CAS) is done using a small surgical cut.  Your surgeon will make a surgical cut in your groin after using some numbing medicine. You will also be given medicine to relax you. The surgeon places a catheter (a flexible tube) through the cut into an artery. It is carefully moved up to your neck to the blockage in your carotid artery. Moving x-ray pictures (fluoroscopy) are used to see the artery and guide the catheter to the correct position. Next, the surgeon will move a wire through the catheter to the blockage. Another catheter with a very small balloon on the end will be pushed over this wire and into the blockage. Then the balloon is inflated. The balloon presses against the inside wall of your artery. This opens the artery and allows more blood to flow to your brain. A stent (a wire mesh tube) may also be placed in the blocked area. The stent is inserted at the same time as the balloon catheter. It expands with the balloon. The stent is left in place to help keep the artery open. The surgeon then removes the balloon.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Carotid surgery ( endarterectomy ) is an older and effective way to treat narrowed or blocked arteries. This procedure is very safe.  CAS has developed as a good alternative to surgery, when done by experienced operators. Certain factors may favor stenting, such as: The person is too ill to have carotid endarterectomy. The location of the narrowing in the carotid artery makes surgery harder. The person has had neck or carotid surgery in the past. The person has had radiation to the neck.  Risks 
 
 Risks of carotid angioplasty and stent placement, which depend on factors such as age, are: Allergic reaction to dye Blood clots  or bleeding at the site of surgery Brain damage Clogging of the inside of the stent (in-stent restenosis) Heart attack Kidney failure (higher risk in people who already have kidney problems) More blockage of the carotid artery over time Seizures  (this is rare) Stroke Before the Procedure 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam and perform several medical tests. Always tell your provider what drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. During the 2 weeks before your procedure: Days before the surgery, you may have to stop taking drugs that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), clopidogrel (Plavix), ticagrelor (Brilinta), prasugrel (Effient) naprosyn (Aleve, Naproxen), and other drugs like these. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke, you need to stop. Ask your provider for help quitting. Always let your provider know about any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illness you may have before your surgery.  DO NOT drink anything after midnight the night before your surgery, including water. On the day of your surgery: Take the drugs you have been told you to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 After surgery, you may need to stay in the hospital overnight so that you can be watched for any signs of bleeding, stroke, or poor blood flow to your brain. You may be able to go home the same day if your procedure is done early in the day and you are doing well. Your provider will talk to you about  how to care for yourself  at home. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Carotid artery angioplasty and stenting may help lower your chance of having a stroke. But you will need to make lifestyle changes to help prevent plaque buildup, blood clots, and other problems in your carotid arteries over time. You may need to change your diet and start an exercise program if your provider tells you exercise is safe for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Carotid angioplasty and stenting; CAS; Angioplasty - carotid artery; Carotid artery stenosis - angioplasty; Images 
 
 
 Atherosclerosis of internal carotid artery 
 Carotid stenosis, x-ray of the right artery 
 Cholesterol producers 
 References 
 
 Amarenco P, Labreuche J, Mazighi M: Lessons from carotid endarterectomy and stenting trials.  Lancet . 2010;376(9746):1028-1031. PMID: 20870079  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20870079 . Brott TG, Halperin JL, Abbara S, et al. 2011 ASA/ACCF/AHA/AANN/AANS/ACR/ASNR/CNS/SAIP/SCAI/SIR/SNIS/SVM/SVS guideline on the management of patients with extracranial carotid and vertebral artery disease.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;81(1)E76-E123. PMID: 23281092  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23281092 . Brott TG, Hobson RW, Howard G, et al: Stenting versus endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-arery stenosis.  N Engl J Med . 2010;363(1):11-23. PMID: 20505173  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20505173 .  Brott TG, Howard G, Roubin GS, et al. Long-term results of stenting versus endarterectomy for carotid-artery stenosis.  N Engl J Med . 2016;374(11):1021-1031. PMID: 26890472  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26890472 . Gurm HS, Yadav JS, Fayad P, et al: Long-term results of carotid stenting versus endarterectomy in high-risk patients.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358(15):1572-1579. PMID: 18403765  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18403765 .  Kinlay S, Bhatt DL. Treatment of noncoronary obstructive vascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 60. Rosenfield K, Matsumura JS, Chaturvedi S, et al. Randomized trial of stent versus surgery for asymptomatic carotid stenosis.  N Engl J Med . 2016;374(11):1011-1020. PMID: 26886419  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26886419 . Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Arteriogram 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Cardiac catheterization 
 Chest pain 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Heart bypass surgery 
 Heart bypass surgery - minimally invasive 
 Heart pacemaker 
 Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
 Stent 
 Ventricular assist device 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Angina - discharge 
 Angina - what to ask your doctor  
 Angina - when you have chest pain 
 Angioplasty and stent - heart - discharge  
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Butter, margarine, and cooking oils 
 Cholesterol and lifestyle 
 Cholesterol - drug treatment 
 Controlling your high blood pressure 
 Dietary fats explained 
 Fast food tips 
 Heart attack - discharge 
 Heart attack - what to ask your doctor 
 Heart disease - risk factors 
 How to read food labels 
 Low-salt diet  
 Mediterranean diet 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carotid Artery Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia