
 
 
 
 
 Angioedema 
 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
    			Angioedema is swelling that is similar to  hives , but the swelling is under the skin instead of on the surface.  Hives are often called welts. They are a surface swelling. It is possible to have angioedema without hives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angioedema may be caused by an  allergic reaction . During the reaction, histamine and other chemicals are released into the bloodstream. The body releases histamine when the immune system detects a foreign substance called an  allergen . In most cases, the cause of angioedema is never found. The following may cause angioedema: Animal dander ( scales  of shed skin) Exposure to water, sunlight, cold or heat Foods (such as berries, shellfish, fish, nuts, eggs, and milk) Insect bites Medicines ( drug allergy ) such as antibiotics (penicillin and sulfa drugs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and blood pressure medicines (ACE inhibitors) Pollen  Hives and angioedema may also occur after infections or with other illnesses (including  autoimmune disorders  such as lupus, and  leukemia  and lymphoma). A form of angioedema runs in families and has different triggers, complications, and treatments. This is called  hereditary angioedema . 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The main symptom is sudden swelling below the skin surface. Welts or swelling on the surface of the skin can also develop. The swelling usually occurs around the eyes and lips. It may also be found on the hands, feet, and throat. The swelling may form a line or be more spread out. The welts are painful and may be itchy. This is known as hives (urticaria). They turn pale and swell if irritated. The deeper swelling of angioedema may also be painful. Other symptoms may include: Abdominal cramping Breathing difficulty Swollen eyes and mouth Swollen lining of the eyes ( chemosis )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The health care provider will look at your skin and ask if you have been exposed to any irritating substances. If your throat is affected, a physical exam might reveal abnormal sounds ( stridor ) when you breathe in. Blood tests or  allergy testing  may be ordered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mild symptoms may not need treatment. Moderate to severe symptoms may need to be treated. Breathing difficulty is an emergency condition. People with angioedema should: 
 
 Avoid any known allergen or trigger that causes their symptoms. 
 Avoid any medicines, herbs, or supplements that are not prescribed by a provider. 
 
 Cool compresses or soaks can relieve pain. 
 Medicines used to treat angioedema include: 
 
 Antihistamines 
 Anti-inflammatory medicines (corticosteroids) 
 Epinephrine shots (people with a history of severe symptoms can carry these with them) 
 Inhaler medicines that help open up the airways 
 
 If the person has trouble breathing, seek medical help right away. A severe, life-threatening airway blockage may occur if the throat swells. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angioedema that does not affect the breathing may be uncomfortable. It is usually harmless and goes away in a few days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your provider if: 
 Angioedema does not respond to treatment 
 It is severe 
 You have never had angioedema before 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if there are any of the following symptoms: 
 
 Abnormal breathing sounds 
 Difficulty breathing or wheezing 
 Fainting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angioneurotic edema; Welts; Allergic reaction - angioedema; Hives - angioedema 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dreskin SC. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 252. Habif TP. Urticaria, angioedema, and pruritus. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:chap 6. Tran TP, Muelleman RL. Allergy, hypersensitivity, angioedema, and anaphylaxis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 119. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 3/20/2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Stuart I. Henochowicz, MD, FACP, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allergy 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Edema 
 Read more       
   
 
