
 Anorectal abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An anorectal abscess is a collection of pus in the area of the anus and rectum. Causes 
 
 Common causes of anorectal abscess include: Blocked glands in the anal area Infection of an  anal fissure Sexually transmitted infection (STD) Trauma Deep rectal abscesses may be caused by intestinal disorders such as  Crohn disease  or  diverticulitis . The following factors increase the risk for an anorectal abscess: 
   Anal sex
    Chemotherapy  medicines used to treat cancer
    Diabetes 
   Inflammatory bowel disease ( Crohn disease  and  ulcerative colitis )
    
   Use of corticosteroid medicines
    
   Weakened immune system (such as from  HIV/AIDS )
    The condition affects men more than women. The condition may occur in infants and toddlers who are still in diapers and who have a history of anal fissures. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms are swelling around the anus and a constant, throbbing pain with swelling. Pain may be severe with bowel movements, coughing and sitting. Other symptoms may include: Constipation Discharge of pus from the rectum Fatigue,  fever , night sweats, and chills Redness, painful and hardened tissue in the area of the anus  Tenderness In infants, the abscess often appears as a swollen, red, tender lump at the edge of the anus. The infant may be fussy and irritable from discomfort. There are usually no other symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 A  rectal examination  may confirm an anorectal abscess. A  proctosigmoidoscopy  may be done to rule out other diseases. In rare cases, a  CT scan ,  MRI , or  ultrasound  is needed to locate the collection of pus.  Treatment 
 
 The problem rarely goes away on its own. Antibiotics alone usually cannot treat an abscess. Treatment involves surgery to open and drain the abscess. Surgery is done using local numbing medicine, along with  medicine to make you sleepy .  Spinal or general anesthesia  may be used. Surgery is most often an outpatient procedure, which means that you go home on the same day. The surgeon cuts open the abscess and drains the pus. If the pus collection is deep, you may need to stay in the hospital until the abscess has completely drained. After surgery, you need warm sitz baths (sitting in a tub of warm water). This helps relieve pain, reduce swelling, and make the abscess easier to drain. Drained abscesses are usually left open and no stitches are needed. The surgeon may prescribe painkillers and antibiotics. You may need stool softeners. Practice good hygiene. Eat soft or liquid foods until the abscess has healed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With prompt treatment, people with this condition usually do well. Infants and toddlers usually recover quickly. Complications can occur when treatment is delayed. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of anorectal abscess may include: Anal  fistula  (abnormal connection between the anus and another structure) Infection that spreads to the blood ( sepsis ) Continuing pain Problem keeps coming back (recurrence) Scars  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you: Notice rectal discharge, pain, or other symptoms of anorectal abscess Have fever, chills, or other new symptoms after being treated for this condition Are a diabetic and your blood glucose becomes difficult to control Prevention 
 
 Prevention or prompt treatment of STDs may prevent an anorectal abscess from forming. Use condoms during intercourse, including anal sex, to prevent such infections. In infants and toddlers, frequent diaper changes and proper cleaning during diaper changes can help prevent both anal fissures and abscesses. Alternative Names 
 
 Anal abscess; Rectal abscess; Perirectal abscess; Perianal abscess; Gland abscess; Abscess - anorectal Images 
 
 
 Rectum 
 References 
 
 Blumetti J, Cintron JR. Anorectal abscess and fistula. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:265-274. Coates WC. Disorders of the anorectum. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 96. Merchea A, Larson DW. Anus. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 52. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Anal fissure 
 Crohn disease 
 Diverticulitis 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 5/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Anal Disorders 
 Rectal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia