
 Anorchia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anorchia is the absence of both  testes  at birth. Causes 
 
 The embryo develops early sex organs in the first several weeks of pregnancy. In some cases, early testes do not develop in males before 8 weeks into the pregnancy. These babies will be born with female sex organs. In some cases, the testes disappear between 8 and 10 weeks. These babies will be born with  ambiguous genitalia . This means the child will have parts of both male and female sex organs. In some cases, the testes may disappear between 12 and 14 weeks. These babies will have normal penis and scrotum. However, they will not have any testes. This is known as congenital anorchia. It is also called the "vanishing testes syndrome." The cause is unknown. Genetic factors may be involved in some cases. This condition should not be confused with  bilateral undescended testes , in which the testes are located in the abdomen or groin. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Normal outside genitals before puberty Failure to start  puberty  at the correct time Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs include: Empty scrotum Lack of male sex characteristics (penis and pubic hair growth, deepening of the voice, and increase in muscle mass)  Tests include: Anti-Müllerian hormone levels Bone density 
   Follicle stimulating hormone ( FSH ) and luteinizing hormone ( LH ) levels Surgery to look for male reproductive tissue Testosterone levels  (low) Ultrasound  or  MRI  to look for testes in the abdomen XY karyotype Treatment 
 
 Treatment includes: Artificial (prosthetic) testicle implants  Male hormones (androgens) Psychological support Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is good with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Face, neck, or back abnormalities in some cases Infertility Psychological issues due to gender identification  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if a male child: Appears to have extremely small or absent testicles  Does not seem to be starting puberty during his early teens Alternative Names 
 
 Vanishing testes - anorchia; Empty scrotum - anorchia; Scrotum - empty (anorchia) Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive system 
 References 
 
 Achermann JC, Hughes IA. Pediatric disorders of sex development. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 23. Ali O, Donohoue PA. Hypofunction of the testes. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 583. Diamond DA, Yu RN. Disorders of sexual development: etiology, evaluation, and medical management. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 150. Read More 
 
 Ambiguous genitalia 
 Infertility 
 Testes 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia