
 Anterior vaginal wall repair 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anterior vaginal wall repair is a surgical procedure. This surgery tightens the front ( anterior ) wall of the vagina. Description 
 
 The anterior vaginal wall can sink (prolapse) or bulge. This occurs when the bladder or the urethra sink into the vagina. The repair may be done while you are under: General anesthesia : You will be asleep and unable to feel pain. Spinal anesthesia : You will be awake, but you will be numb from the waist down and you will not feel pain. You will be given medicines to help you relax. Your surgeon will: Make a surgical cut through the front wall of your  vagina . Move your bladder back to its normal location. May fold your vagina, or cut away part of it. Put sutures (stitches) in the tissue between your vagina and bladder. These will hold the walls of your vagina in the correct position. Place a patch between your bladder and vagina. This patch can be made of man-made material (synthetic skin) or commercially available biological material (such as pig skin). Attach sutures to the walls of the vagina to the tissue on the side of your pelvis. Sometimes, the surgeon will also make a surgical cut in your belly. This cut may be up and down or across. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This procedure is used to repair sinking or bulging of the vaginal wall. Symptoms of  uterine prolapse  include: You may not be able to empty your bladder completely. Your bladder may feel full all the time. You may feel pressure in your vagina. You may be able to feel or see a bulging at the opening of the vagina. You may have pain when you have sex. You may leak urine when you cough, sneeze, or lift something. You may get bladder infections.  This surgery by itself does not treat  stress incontinence . Stress incontinence is the leaking of urine when you cough, sneeze, or lift. It may be performed along with other surgeries. Before doing this surgery, your provider may have you: Learn pelvic floor muscle exercises ( Kegel exercises ) Use estrogen cream in your vagina Try a device called a pessary in your vagina to hold up the prolapse Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots Infection Risks of this procedure include: Damage to the urethra, bladder, or vagina Irritable bladder Changes in the vagina (prolapsed vagina) Urine leakage from the vagina or to the skin (fistula)  Worsening  urinary incontinence Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your provider what drugs you are taking. Also tell the provider about the drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. During the days before the surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery.  On the day of your surgery: You very often will be asked not to drink or eat anything for 6 to 12 hours before the surgery. Take the medicines your provider told you to take with a small sip of water. Your provider will tell you when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 You may have a  catheter  to drain urine for 1 or 2 days after surgery. You will be on a liquid diet right after surgery. When your normal bowel function returns, you can return to your regular diet. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This surgery will very often repair the prolapse and the symptoms will go away. This improvement will often last for years. Alternative Names 
 
 A/P repair; Vaginal wall repair; Posterior vaginal wall repair; Colporrhaphy - repair of vaginal wall; Cystocele repair; Uterine prolapse - vaginal wall repair; Urinary incontinence - vaginal wall repair Images 
 
 
 Anterior vaginal wall repair 
 Cystocele 
 Anterior vaginal wall repair (surgical treatment of urinary incontinence) - series 
 References 
 
 Maher CM, Feiner B, Baessler K, Glazener CM. Surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse in women: the updated summary version Cochrane review.  Int Urogynecol J . 2011;22(11):1445-1457. PMID: 21927941  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21927941 . Winters JC, Smith AL, Krlin RM. Vaginal and abdominal reconstructive surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 83. Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Inflatable artificial sphincter 
 Stress urinary incontinence 
 Urinary catheters 
 Urinary incontinence - injectable implant 
 Urinary incontinence - retropubic suspension 
 Urinary incontinence - tension-free vaginal tape 
 Urinary incontinence - vaginal sling procedures 
 Vagina 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Kegel exercises - self-care 
 Self catheterization - female 
 Suprapubic catheter care 
 Urinary incontinence products - self-care 
 Urinary incontinence surgery - female - discharge  
 Urine drainage bags 
 When you have urinary incontinence 
 Review Date 5/23/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pelvic Support Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia