
 Antifreeze poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Antifreeze is a liquid used to cool engines. It is also called engine coolant. This article discusses poisoning caused by swallowing antifreeze. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The poisonous ingredients in antifreeze are: Ethylene glycol  Methanol Propylene glycol  Where Found 
 
 The above ingredients are found in various antifreezes. They may also be used in other products. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of antifreeze poisoning in different parts of the body. Airways and lungs Rapid breathing No breathing Bladder and kidneys Blood in urine No urine output  or decreased urine output  Eyes, ears, nose, and throat Blurred vision Blindness  Heart and blood Rapid heartbeat Low blood pressure  Muscles and joints: Leg cramps Nervous system Coma Convulsions Dizziness Fatigue Headache Slurred speech Stupor  (lack of alertness) Unconsciousness Unsteady walk Weakness Skin: Blue lips and fingernails Stomach and gastrointestinal tract Nausea and vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Use standard first aid and CPR for signs of shock or no heartbeat (cardiac arrest). Call your local poison control center or 911 for more help. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced brain imaging) EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to reverse the effects of the poison Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (sometimes)  Dialysis (kidney machine) treatment may be needed during recovery. Sometimes the person will need it for the rest of their life. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 For ethylene glycol: Death may occur within the first 24 hours. If the patient survives, there may be little or no urine output for several weeks before the kidneys recover. Any brain damage may be permanent. Vision loss or blindness may also be permanent. For methanol: Methanol is extremely toxic. As little as 2 tablespoons (1 ounce or 30 milliliters) can kill a child, and 4 to 16 tablespoons (2 to 8 ounces or 60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. The outcome depends on how much was swallowed and how soon appropriate care was given. Permanent damage to the nervous system may occur. This can cause blindness, decreased mental functioning, and a condition similar to Parkinson disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Engine coolant poisoning References 
 
 Thomas SHL, White J. Poisoning. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, et al., eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 9. White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia