
 Anti-smooth muscle antibody 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anti-smooth muscle antibody is a blood test that detects the presence of  antibodies  against smooth muscle. The antibody is useful in making a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. This may be taken through a vein. The procedure is called a  venipuncture . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special steps are needed to prepare for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test if you have signs of certain diseases, such as  hepatitis  and  cirrhosis . These conditions can trigger the body to form antibodies against smooth muscle. Normal Results 
 
 Normally, there are no antibodies present. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A positive test may be due to: Chronic active autoimmune hepatitis Cirrhosis Infectious mononucleosis The test also helps distinguish  autoimmune hepatitis  from  systemic lupus erythematosus . Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Types of muscle tissue 
 References 
 
 Czaja AJ. Autoimmune hepatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 88. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Mononucleosis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Infectious Mononucleosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia