
 Antithyroid microsomal antibody 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Microsomes are found inside thyroid cells. The body produces  antibodies  to microsomes when there has been damage to thyroid cells. The antithyroid microsomal antibody test measures these antibodies in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to confirm the cause of thyroid problems, including  Hashimoto thyroiditis . The test is also used to find out if an immune or  autoimmune disorder  is damaging the thyroid. Normal Results 
 
 A negative test means the result is normal. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A positive test may be due to: Granulomatous thyroiditis Hashimoto thyroiditis High levels of these antibodies have also been linked with an increased risk of: Miscarriage Preeclampsia Premature birth In vitro fertilization  failure  Important: A positive result does not always mean that you have a thyroid condition or that you need treatment for your thyroid. A positive result may mean that you have a higher chance of developing thyroid disease in the future. Antithyroid microsomal antibodies may be seen in your blood if you have other autoimmune conditions, including: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia Autoimmune hepatitis Autoimmune adrenal disease Rheumatoid arthritis Sjögren syndrome Systemic lupus erythematosus Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Thyroid antimicrosomal antibody; Antimicrosomal antibody; Microsomal antibody; Thyroid peroxidase antibody; TPOAb Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Salvatore D, Davies TF, Schlumberger MJ, et al. Thyroid physiology and diagnostic evaluation of patients with thyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 11. Weiss RE, Refetoff S. Thyroid function testing. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Cancer 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Goiter - simple 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 Subacute thyroiditis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Hepatitis 
 Lupus 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Sjogren's Syndrome 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Thyroid Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia