
 Anticoagulant rodenticides poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anticoagulant rodenticides are poisons used to kill rats. Rodenticide means rodent killer. An anticoagulant is a blood thinner. Anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning occurs when someone swallows a product containing these chemicals. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: 2-isovaleryl-1,3-indandione 2-pivaloyl-1,3-indandione Brodifacoum Chlorophacinone Coumachlor Difenacoum Diphacinone Warfarin  Note:  This list may not be all-inclusive. Where Found 
 
 These ingredients may be found in: D-Con Mouse Prufe II, Talon (brodifacoum) Ramik, Diphacin (diphacinone)  Note:  This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Blood in the urine Bloody stools Bruising and bleeding under the skin Confusion, lethargy, or altered mental status from bleeding in the brain Low blood pressure Nosebleed Pale skin Shock Vomiting blood Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed How much was swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive: Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent the person from breathing in blood. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed. Blood transfusion, including clotting factors (which help your blood clot), and red blood cells. Chest x-ray. EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing). Endoscopy -- a camera down the throat to see the esophagus and stomach. Fluids through a vein (IV). Medicines to treat symptoms. Medicine (activated charcoal) to absorb any remaining poison and laxatives to move it quickly through the body. Medicine (antidote) such as vitamin K to reverse the effect of the poison. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Death may occur as late as 2 weeks after the poisoning as a result of bleeding. However, getting the right treatment most often prevents serious complications. If blood loss has damaged the heart or other vital organs, recovery may take longer. The person may not fully recover in these cases. Alternative Names 
 
 Rat killer poisoning; Rodenticide poisoning References 
 
 Cannon RD, Ruha AM. Insecticides, herbicides, and rodenticides. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 146. Janz TG, Hamilton GC, Eckstein M. Disorders of hemostasis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 122. 
 Review Date 10/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia