
 Aortic valve surgery - minimally invasive 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blood flows out of your heart and into a large blood vessel called the aorta. The aortic valve separates the heart and aorta. The aortic valve opens so blood can flow out. It then closes to keep blood from returning to the heart.  You may need aortic valve surgery to replace the aortic valve in your heart if:  Your aortic valve does not close all the way so blood leaks back into the heart. This is called aortic regurgitation. Your aortic valve does not open fully so blood flow out of the heart is reduced. This is called aortic stenosis.  The aortic valve can be replaced using: Minimally invasive aortic valve surgery, done using one or more small cuts Open aortic valve surgery , done by making a large cut in your chest  Description 
 
 Before your surgery you will receive  general anesthesia .  You will be asleep and pain-free. There are several ways to do minimally invasive aortic valve surgery. Techniques include min-thoracotomy, min-sternotomy, robot-assisted surgery, and percutaneous surgery. To perform the different procedures:  Your surgeon may make a 2-inch to 3-inch (5 to 7.5 centimeters) cut in the right part of your chest near the sternum (breastbone). The muscles in the area will be divided. This lets the surgeon reach the heart and aortic valve. Your surgeon may split only the upper portion of your breast bone allowing exposure to the aortic valve. For robotically-assisted valve surgery, the surgeon makes 2 to 4 tiny cuts in your chest. The surgeon uses a special computer to control robotic arms during the surgery. A 3D view of the heart and aortic valve are displayed on a computer in the operating room.  You may need to be on a heart-lung machine for all of these surgeries. When the aortic valve is too damaged for repair, a new valve is put in place. Your surgeon will remove your aortic valve and sew a new one into place. There are two main types of new valves: Mechanical, made of man-made materials, such as titanium or carbon. These valves last the longest. You will need to take blood-thinning medicine, such as warfarin (Coumadin), for the rest of your life if you have this type of valve. Biological, made of human or animal tissue. These valves last 10 to 20 years, but you may not need to take blood thinners for life.  Another technique is  transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) . TAVR aortic valve surgery can be done through a small incision made in the groin or the left chest. In some cases, you will have coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), or surgery to replace part of the aorta at the same time.  Once the new valve is working, your surgeon will: Close the small cut to your heart or aorta Place catheters (flexible tubes) around your heart to drain fluids that build up Close the surgical cut in your muscles and skin  The surgery can take 3 to 6 hours, however a TAVR procedure is often shorter.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Aortic valve surgery is done when the valve does not work properly. Surgery may be done for these reasons:  Changes in your aortic valve are causing major heart symptoms, such as chest pain, shortness of breath, fainting spells, or heart failure. Tests show that changes in your aortic valve are harming the work of your heart. Damage to your heart valve from infection ( endocarditis )  A minimally invasive procedure can have many benefits. There is less pain, blood loss, and risk of infection. You will also recover faster than you would from open heart surgery. Percutaneous valvuloplasty and catheter-based valve replacement (TAVR) are done only in people who are too sick or at very high risk for major heart surgery. The results of percutaneous valvuloplasty are not long-lasting.  Risks 
 
 Risks of any anesthesia are: Bleeding Blood clots  in the legs that may travel to the lungs Breathing problems Infection, including in the lungs, kidneys, bladder, chest, or heart valves Reactions to medicines  Other risks vary by the person's age. Some of these risks are: Damage to other organs, nerves, or bones Heart attack,  stroke , or death Infection of the new valve Kidney failure Irregular heartbeat  that must be treated with medicines or a pacemaker Poor healing of incision  Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider: If you are or could be pregnant What medicines you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription You may be able to store blood in the blood bank for transfusions during and after your surgery. Ask your provider about how you and your family members can donate blood. For the week before surgery, you may be asked to stop taking medicines that make it harder for your blood to clot. These might cause increased bleeding during the surgery. Some of them are aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). If you are taking warfarin (Coumadin) or clopidogrel (Plavix), talk with your surgeon before stopping or changing how you take these drugs.  During the days before your surgery: Ask which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke, you must stop. Ask your provider for help. Always let your provider know if you have a cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or any other illness in the time leading up to your surgery.  Prepare your house for when you get home from the hospital.  Shower and wash your hair the day before surgery. You may need to wash your body below your neck with a special soap. Scrub your chest 2 or 3 times with this soap. You also may be asked to take an antibiotic to prevent infection. On the day of your surgery: You may be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before your surgery. This includes using chewing gum and mints. Rinse your mouth with water if it feels dry. Be careful not to swallow.  Take the medicines you have been told to take with a small sip of water.  You will be told when to arrive at the hospital. After the Procedure 
 
 After your operation, you will spend 3 to 7 days in the hospital. You will spend the first night in an intensive care unit (ICU). Nurses will monitor your condition at all times.  Most of the time, you will be moved to a regular room or a transitional care unit in the hospital within 24 hours. You will start activity slowly. You may begin a program to make your heart and body stronger.  You may have two or three tubes in your chest to drain fluid from around your heart. Most of the time, these are taken out 1 to 3 days after surgery.  You may have a catheter (flexible tube) in your bladder to drain urine. You may also have intravenous (IV) lines for fluids. Nurses will closely watch monitors that display your vital signs (pulse, temperature, and breathing). You will have daily blood tests and  EKGs  to test your heart function until you are well enough to go home. A temporary  pacemaker  may be placed in your heart if your heart rhythm becomes too slow after surgery. Once you are home, recovery takes time. Take it easy, and be patient with yourself. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Mechanical heart valves do not fail often. However, blood clots can develop on them. If a blood clot forms, you may have a stroke. Bleeding can occur, but this is rare.  Biological valves have a lower risk of blood clots, but tend to fail over time. Minimally invasive heart valve surgery has improved in recent years. These techniques are safe for most people and can reduce recovery time and pain. For best results, choose to have your aortic valve surgery at a center that does many of these procedures.  Alternative Names 
 
 Mini-thoracotomy aortic valve replacement or repair; Cardiac valvular surgery; Mini-sternotomy; Robotically-assisted aortic valve replacement References 
 
 Coeytaux RR, Williams JW Jr, Gray RN, Wang A. Percutaneous heart valve replacement for aortic stenosis: state of the evidence.  Ann Intern Med . 2010;153(5):314-324. PMID: 20679543  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20679543 .  Fullerton DA, Harken AH. Acquired heart disease: valvular. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 61.  Otto CM, Bonow RO. Valvular heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 63. Schmitto JD, Mokashi SA, Cohn LH. Minimally-invasive valve surgery.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56(6):455-462. PMID: 20670754  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20670754 .  Webb JG, Carroll JD. Transcatheter therapies for structural heart disease in adults. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 56. Read More 
 
 Aortic valve surgery - open 
 Endocarditis 
 Pediatric heart surgery 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Heart valve surgery - discharge  
 Pediatric heart surgery - discharge 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin) 
 Review Date 3/8/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dale Mueller, MD, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgeon, HeartCare Midwest; Chairman Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Surgery, OSF St. Francis Medical Center; and Clinical Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Illinois, Peoria, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 08/19/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Valve Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia