
 Aortic angiography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aortic angiography is a procedure that uses a special dye and x-rays to see how blood flows through the aorta. The aorta is the major artery leading out of the heart, and through your abdomen or belly. Angiography uses x-rays and a special dye to see inside the arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done at a hospital. Before the test starts, you will be given a mild sedative to help you relax. An area of your body, most often in your arm or groin area, is cleaned and numbed with a local numbing medicine (anesthetic). A radiologist or cardiologist will place a needle into the groin blood vessel. A guidewire and a long tube (catheter) will be passed through this needle. The catheter is moved into the aorta. The doctor can see live images of the aorta on a TV-like monitor, and x-rays are used to guide the catheter to the correct position. Once the catheter is in place, dye is injected into it. X-ray images are taken to see how the dye moves through the aorta. The dye helps detect any blockages in blood flow.  After the x-rays or treatments are finished, the catheter is removed. Pressure is applied to the puncture site for 20 to 45 minutes to stop the bleeding. After that time, the area is checked and a tight bandage is applied. The leg is most often kept straight for another 6 hours after the procedure. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will not eat or drink anything for 6 to 8 hours before the test. You will wear a hospital gown and sign a consent form for the procedure. Remove jewelry from the area being studied. Tell your health care provider: If you are pregnant If you have ever had any allergic reactions to x-ray contrast material or iodine substances If you are allergic to any medicines Which medicines you are taking (including any herbal preparations) If you have ever had any bleeding problems  How the Test Will Feel 
 
 You will be awake during the test. You may feel a sting as the numbing medicine is given and some pressure as the catheter is inserted. You may feel a warm flushing when the contrast dye flows through the catheter. This is normal and most often goes away in a few seconds. You may have some discomfort from lying on the hospital table and staying still for a long time. In most cases, you can resume normal activity the day after the procedure. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may ask for this test if there are signs or symptoms of a problem with the aorta or its branches, including: Aortic aneurysm Aortic dissection Congenital (present from birth) problems AV malformation Double aortic arch Coarctation of the aorta Vascular ring Injury to the aorta Takayasu's arteritis What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Abdominal aortic aneurysm Aortic dissection Aortic regurgitation Aortic stenosis Congenital (present from birth) problems Double aortic arch Coarction of the aorta Vascular ring Injury to the aorta Mesenteric ischemia Peripheral artery disease Renal artery stenosis Takayasu's arteritis  Risks 
 
 Risks of aortic angiography include: Allergic reaction to the contrast dye Blockage of the artery Blood clot that travels to the lungs Bruising at the site of catheter insertion Damage to the blood vessel where the needle and catheter are inserted Excessive bleeding or a  blood clot  where the catheter is inserted, which can reduce blood flow to the leg Heart attack or  stroke Hematoma, a collection of blood at the site of the needle puncture Infection Injury to the nerves at the needle puncture site Kidney damage from the dye  Considerations 
 
 This procedure may be combined with  left heart catheterization  to look for coronary artery disease. Aortic angiography has been mostly replaced by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) angiography. Alternative Names 
 
 Angiography - aorta; Aortography; Abdominal aorta angiogram; Aortic arteriogram Images 
 
 
 Cardiac arteriogram 
 References 
 
 Fattori R, Lovato L. The thortic aortica. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 24. Jackson JE, Meaney JFM. Angiography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 84. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open 
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular 
 Aortic dissection 
 Aortic insufficiency 
 Aortic stenosis 
 Magnetic resonance angiography 
 X-ray 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge  
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge 
 Review Date 12/26/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Vasculitis 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia