
 Aortic dissection 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aortic dissection is a serious condition in which there is a tear in the wall of the major artery carrying blood out of the heart (aorta). As the tear extends along the wall of the aorta, blood can flow in between the layers of the blood vessel wall (dissection). This can lead to aortic rupture or decreased blood flow (ischemia) to organs. Causes 
 
 When it leaves the heart, the aorta first moves up through the chest towards the head (the ascending aorta). It then bends or arches, and finally moves down through the chest and abdomen (the descending aorta). Aortic dissection most often happens because of a tear or damage to the inner wall of the aorta. This very often occurs in the chest (thoracic) part of the artery, but it may also occur in the abdominal aorta. When a tear occurs, it creates 2 channels: One in which blood continues to travel Another where blood stays still  If the channel with non-traveling blood gets bigger, it can push on other branches of the aorta. This can narrow the other branches and reduce blood flow through them. An aortic dissection may also cause abnormal widening or ballooning of the aorta ( aneurysm ). The exact cause is unknown, but more common risks include:  Aging Atherosclerosis Blunt trauma to the chest, such as hitting the steering wheel of a car during an accident High blood pressure Other risk factors and conditions linked to aortic dissection include: 
   Bicuspid aortic valve
    Coarctation (narrowing) of the aorta Connective tissue disorders (such as  Marfan syndrome  and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) and rare genetic disorders
    Heart surgery or procedures Pregnancy 
   Swelling of the blood vessels due to conditions such as arteritis and syphilis
    Aortic dissection occurs in about 2 out of every 10,000 people. It can affect anyone, but is most often seen in men ages 40 to 70. Symptoms 
 
 In most cases, the symptoms begin suddenly, and include severe  chest pain . The pain may feel like a heart attack. Pain can be described as sharp, stabbing, tearing, or ripping. It is felt below the chest bone, and then moves under the shoulder blades or to the back. Pain can move to the shoulder, neck, arm, jaw, abdomen, or hips. The pain changes position, often moving to the arms and legs as the aortic dissection gets worse. Symptoms are caused by a decrease of blood flowing to the rest of the body, and can include: Anxiety and a feeling of doom Fainting  or  dizziness Heavy sweating  (clammy skin) Nausea and vomiting Pale skin ( pallor ) 
   Rapid, weak pulse
    Shortness of breath and trouble breathing when lying flat ( orthopnea )  Other symptoms may include: Pain in the abdomen Stroke symptoms Swallowing difficulties from pressure on the esophagus  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will take your family history and listen to your heart, lungs, and abdomen with a stethoscope. The exam may find: A "blowing" murmur over the aorta, heart murmur, or other abnormal sound A difference in blood pressure between the right and left arms, or between the arms and legs Low blood pressure Signs resembling a heart attack Signs of  shock , but with normal blood pressure  Aortic dissection or aortic aneurysm may be seen on: Aortic angiography Chest x-ray Chest MRI CT scan of chest  with dye Doppler ultrasonography  (occasionally performed) Echocardiogram Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE)  Blood work to rule out a heart attack  is needed.  Treatment 
 
 Aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition and needs to be treated right away. Dissections that occur in the part of the aorta that is leaving the heart (ascending) are treated with surgery. Dissections that occur in other parts of the aorta (descending) may be managed with surgery or medicines.  Two techniques may be used for surgery: Standard, open surgery. This requires a surgical incision that is made in the chest or abdomen. Endovascular aortic repair. This surgery is done without any major surgical incisions.  Drugs that lower blood pressure may be prescribed. These drugs may be given through a vein (intravenously). Beta-blockers are the first drugs of choice. Strong pain relievers are very often needed. If the aortic valve is damaged, valve replacement is needed. If the heart arteries are involved, a coronary bypass is also performed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Aortic dissection is life threatening. The condition can be managed with surgery if it is done before the aorta ruptures. Less than one half of people with a ruptured aorta survive. Those who survive will need lifelong, aggressive treatment of high blood pressure. They will need to be followed up with CT scans every few months to monitor the aorta. Possible Complications 
 
 Aortic dissection may decrease or stop the blood flow to many different parts of the body. This may result in short-term or long-term problems, or damage to the: Brain Heart Intestines or bowels Kidneys Legs  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have symptoms of an aortic dissection or severe chest pain, call 911 or your local emergency number, or go to the emergency room as quickly as possible. Prevention 
 
 Many cases of aortic dissection cannot be prevented. Things you can do to reduce your risk include: Treating and controlling hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis) Keeping high blood pressure under control, especially if you are at risk for dissection Taking safety precautions to prevent injuries that can cause dissections If you have been diagnosed with Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, making sure you regularly follow-up with your provider Alternative Names 
 
 Aortic aneurysm - dissecting; Chest pain - aortic dissection; Thoracic aortic aneurysm - dissection Images 
 
 
 Aortic rupture, chest x-ray 
 Aortic aneurysm 
 Aortic dissection 
 References 
 
 Braverman AC. Diseases of the aorta. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 57. Conrad MF, Cambria RP. Aortic dissection. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston W, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 138. Lederle FA. Diseases of the aorta. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Aneurysm 
 Aortic insufficiency 
 Blood clots 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 High blood pressure 
 Magnetic resonance angiography 
 Marfan syndrome 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 6/6/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, RPVI, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aortic Aneurysm 
 Browse the Encyclopedia