
 Apolipoprotein B100 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Apolipoprotein B100 (apoB100) is a protein that plays a role in moving cholesterol around your body. It is a form of low density lipoprotein (LDL). Mutations (changes) in apoB100 can cause a condition called  familial hypercholesterolemia . This is a form of high cholesterol that is passed down in families (inherited). This article discusses the test used to measure the level of apoB100 in the blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider may tell you not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, you may feel moderate pain, or only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Most often, this test is done to help determine the cause or specific type of high blood cholesterol. It is not clear whether the information helps improve treatment. Because of this, most health insurance companies DO NOT pay for the test. If you DO NOT have a diagnosis of high cholesterol or heart disease, this test may not be recommended for you. Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is about 50 to 150 mg/dL. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result may mean you have high lipid (fat) levels in your blood. A medical term for this is  hyperlipidemia . Other disorders that may be associated with high apoB100 levels include atherosclerotic vascular disease such as  angina pectoris  (chest pain that occurs with activity or stress) and  heart attack . Risks 
 
 Risks linked with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Multiple punctures to locate veins  Considerations 
 
 Apolipoprotein measurements may provide more detail about your risk for heart disease, but the added value of this test beyond a lipid panel is unknown. Alternative Names 
 
 ApoB100; Apoprotein B100; Hypercholesterolemia - apolipoprotein B100 Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Robinson JG. What is the role of advanced lipoprotein analysis in practice?  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(25):2607-2615. PMID: 23257303  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23257303 .  Semenkovich CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Read More 
 
 Angina 
 Familial combined hyperlipidemia 
 Heart attack 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 Metabolism 
 Triglyceride level 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Angina 
 Cholesterol 
 Heart Attack 
 Browse the Encyclopedia