
 Armpit lump 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An armpit lump is a swelling or bump under the arm. A lump in the armpit can have many causes. These include swollen lymph nodes, infections, or cysts. Causes 
 
 Lumps in the armpit may have many causes.  Lymph nodes act as filters that can catch germs or cancerous tumor cells. When they do, lymph nodes increase in size and are easily felt. Reasons lymph nodes in the armpit area may be enlarged are: Arm or breast infection Some body wide infections, such as mono, AIDS, or herpes Cancers, such as lymphomas or breast cancer Cysts or abscesses under the skin may also produce large, painful lumps in the armpit. These may be caused by shaving or use of antiperspirants (not deodorants). This is most often seen in teens just beginning to shave. Other causes of armpit lumps may include: Cat scratch disease Lipomas (harmless fatty growths) Use of certain medicines or vaccinations Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on the reason for the lump. Check with your health care provider to determine the cause. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 An armpit lump in a woman may be a sign of breast cancer, and it should be checked by a health care provider right away.  Call your provider if you have an unexplained armpit lump. Do not try to diagnose lumps by yourself. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you and gently press on the nodes. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms, such as: When did you first notice the lump? Has the lump changed? Are you breastfeeding? Is there anything that makes the lump worse? Is the lump painful? Do you have any other symptoms?  You may need more tests, depending on the results of your physical exam.  Alternative Names 
 
 Lump in the armpit; Localized lymphadenopathy - armpit; Axillary lymphadenopathy; Axillary lymph enlargement; Lymph nodes enlargement - axillary; Axillary abscess Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 Lymphatic system 
 Swollen lymph nodes under arm 
 References 
 
 Armitage JO, Bierman PJ. Approach to the patient with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 168. Tower RL, Camitta BM. Lymphadenopathy. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 490. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Breast cancer 
 Breast self-exam 
 Cyst 
 Deodorant poisoning 
 Malignancy 
 Tumor 
 Vaccines (immunizations) - overview 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arm Injuries and Disorders 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia