
 Arrhenoblastoma of ovary 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Arrhenoblastoma of the ovary is an  ovarian tumor  that releases the male hormone  testosterone  or other hormones.  Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor  is a related condition. Causes 
 
 This is a rare tumor. It accounts for less than 0.5% of all ovarian tumors. These tumors are found in women of all age groups, but are most common in young women. Symptoms 
 
 This tumor releases male hormones, which cause the following symptoms in women: Deepening of the voice Increased acne Increased hair on the face and body Increased size of the clitoris Male pattern baldness  Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests are used to diagnose the condition: Blood tests to check levels of hormones that may be released by the tumor CT scan  of the pelvis and abdomen to see if the tumor has spread Ultrasound of the ovaries  Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the tumor is the main treatment. If the cancer has spread, chemotherapy or radiation therapy may be considered. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the  stress  of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome of this disease depends on whether it has spread, and whether surgery can completely remove the tumor.  Arrhenoblastoma has a low chance of spreading. If the tumor is found early, the cure rate can be very good. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Complications of surgery Masculine symptoms (virilization) Spread of the tumor if it is not completely removed  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you are a woman and have masculine symptoms. Also call if you feel a lump in your lower belly area. Prevention 
 
 There is no good screening test. Regular gynecologic exams and recognizing masculine symptoms may help detect the disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Stromal tumor; Gonadal stromal tumor; Sex cord tumor; Androblastoma References 
 
 Bulun SE. The physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.  13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 17. Lobo RA. Hyperandrogenism. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Testosterone 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia