
 Ascites 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ascites is the build-up of fluid in the space between the lining of the abdomen and abdominal organs.  Causes 
 
 Ascites results from high pressure in the blood vessels of the liver (portal hypertension) and low levels of a protein called  albumin . Diseases that can cause  severe liver damage  can lead to ascites. These include long-term  hepatitis C or B infection  and  alcohol abuse  over many years. People with certain cancers in the abdomen may develop ascites. These include cancer of the appendix, colon, ovaries, uterus, pancreas, and liver. Other conditions that can cause this problem include: Clots in the veins of the liver (portal vein thrombosis) Congestive heart failure Pancreatitis Thickening and scarring of the sac-like covering of the heart  Kidney dialysis may also be linked to ascites. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may develop slowly or suddenly depending on the cause of ascites. You may have no symptoms if there is only a small amount of fluid in the belly. As more fluid collects, you may have abdominal pain and bloating. Large amounts of fluid can cause shortness of breath. Many other symptoms of  liver failure  may also be present. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will do a physical exam to determine the amount of swelling in your belly. You may also have the following tests to assess your liver and kidneys: 24-hour urine collection Electrolyte levels Kidney function tests Liver function tests Tests to measure the risk of bleeding and protein levels in the blood Urinalysis Abdominal ultrasound  Your doctor may also  use a thin needle  to withdraw ascites fluid from your belly. The fluid is tested to look for the cause of ascites. Treatment 
 
 LIFESTYLE CHANGES The condition that causes ascites will be treated, if possible. Treatments for fluid build-up may include  lifestyle changes : Avoiding alcohol Lowering salt in your diet (no more than 1,500 mg/day of sodium) Limiting fluid intake  You may also get medicines from your doctor, including: "Water pills" (diuretics) to get rid of extra fluid Antibiotics for infections  Other things you can do to help take care of your liver disease are: Get vaccinated for diseases such as influenza, hepatitis A and hepatitis B, and pneumococcal pneumonia Talk to your doctor about all medicines you take, including herbs and supplements and over-the-counter medicines Procedures that you may have are: Inserting a needle into the belly to remove large volumes of fluid (called a paracentesis) Placing a  special tube or shunt  inside your liver (TIPS) to repair blood flow to the liver  People with end-stage liver disease may need a  liver transplant . Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis  (a life-threatening infection of the ascites fluid) Hepatorenal syndrome  (kidney failure) Weight loss and protein malnutrition Mental confusion, change in the level of alertness, or coma (hepatic encephalopathy) Other complications of liver cirrhosis  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have ascites, call your health care provider right away if you have: Fever above 100.5°F (38.05°C), or a fever that does not go away Belly pain Blood in your stool or black, tarry stools Blood in your vomit Bruising or bleeding that occurs easily Build-up of fluid in your belly Swollen legs or ankles Breathing problems Confusion or problems staying awake Yellow color in your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice)  Alternative Names 
 
 Portal hypertension - ascites; Cirrhosis - ascites; Liver failure - ascites; Alcohol use - ascites; End-stage liver disease - ascites; ESLD - ascites Images 
 
 
 Ascites with ovarian cancer, CT scan 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Runyon BA. Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Runyon BA; AASLD Practice Guidelines Committee. Management of adult patients with ascites due to cirrhosis: update 2012.  Hepatology . 2009;49(6):2087-2107. PMID: 19475696  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19475696 . Read More 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Liver disease 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Pericarditis - constrictive 
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Liver Diseases 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia