
 Aspergillosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aspergillosis is an infection or  allergic response  due to the  Aspergillus  fungus. Causes 
 
 Aspergillosis is caused by a fungus called  Aspergillus . The fungus is often found growing on dead leaves, stored grain, compost piles, or in other decaying vegetation. It can also be found on marijuana leaves. Although most people are often exposed to  Aspergillus , infections caused by the fungus rarely occur in people who have a healthy immune system. There are several forms of aspergillosis: Allergic pulmonary aspergillosis is an allergic reaction to the fungus. This infection usually develops in people who already have lung problems such as asthma or cystic fibrosis. Aspergilloma  is a growth (fungus ball) that develops in an area of past lung disease or lung scarring such as  tuberculosis  or  lung abscess . Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis is a serious infection with pneumonia. It can spread to other parts of the body. This infection occurs most often in people with a weakened immune system. This can be from cancer, AIDS, leukemia, an organ transplant, chemotherapy, or other conditions or drugs that lower the number or function of white blood cells or weaken the immune system.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the type of infection. Symptoms of allergic pulmonary aspergillosis may include: Cough Coughing up blood or brownish mucus plugs Fever General ill feeling (malaise) Wheezing Weight loss  Other symptoms depend on the part of the body affected, and may include: Bone pain Chest pain Chills Decreased urine output Headaches Increased phlegm production, which may be bloody Shortness of breath Skin sores (lesions) Vision problems  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests to diagnose  Aspergillus  infection include: Aspergillus  antibody test Chest x-ray Complete blood count CT scan Galactomannan (a molecule from the fungus that is sometimes found in the blood) Immunoglobulin E (IgE) blood level Lung function tests Sputum stain and culture for  Aspergillus Tissue  biopsy Treatment 
 
 A fungus ball is usually not treated with antifungal medicines unless there is bleeding into the lung tissue. In such a case, surgery and medicines are needed. Invasive aspergillosis is treated with several weeks of an antifungal medicine. It can be given by mouth or IV (into a vein).  Endocarditis  caused by  Aspergillus  is treated by surgically removing the infected heart valves. Long-term antifungal drugs are also needed. Allergic aspergillosis is treated with drugs that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressive drugs), such as prednisone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, people with allergic aspergillosis usually get better over time. It is common for the disease to come back (relapse) and need repeat treatment. If invasive aspergillosis does not get better with drug treatment, it eventually leads to death. The outlook for invasive aspergillosis also depends on the person's underlying disease and immune system health. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems from the disease or treatment include: Amphotericin B can cause kidney damage and unpleasant side effects such as fever and chills Bronchiectasis (permanent scarring and enlargement of the small sacs in the lungs) Invasive lung disease can cause massive bleeding from the lung Mucus plugs in the airways Permanent airway blockage Respiratory failure When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of aspergillosis or if you have a weakened immune system and develop a fever. Prevention 
 
 Precautions should be taken when using medicines that suppress the immune system. Preventing  HIV/AIDS  also prevents certain diseases, including aspergillosis, that are associated with a damaged or weakened immune system. Alternative Names 
 
 Aspergillus  infection Images 
 
 
 Aspergilloma 
 Pulmonary aspergillosis 
 Aspergillosis - chest x-ray 
 References 
 
 Patterson TF.  Aspergillus  species. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 259. Walsh TJ. Aspergillosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 339. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Asthma 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Cancer 
 Chemotherapy 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Invasive 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Pulmonary aspergilloma 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aspergillosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia