
 Aspergillosis precipitin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Aspergillosis precipitin is a laboratory test to detect  antibodies  in the blood resulting from exposure to the fungus  aspergillus . How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample is needed . The sample is sent to a laboratory where it is examined for precipitin bands that form when aspergillus antibodies are present. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of an  aspergillosis  infection. Normal Results 
 
 A normal test result means you do not have aspergillus  antibodies . Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A positive result means antibodies to the fungus have been detected. This result means you have been exposed to the fungus at some point, but it does not necessarily mean you have an active infection. False-negative results are possible. For example, invasive aspergillosis often does not produce a positive result, even though aspergillus is present. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Aspergillus immunodiffusion test; Test for precipitating antibodies Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Iwen PC. Mycotic diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 61. Patterson TF.  Aspergillus species . In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 259. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Aspergillosis 
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Aspergillosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia