
 Asphalt cement poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Asphalt is a brownish-black liquid petroleum material that hardens when it cools. Asphalt cement poisoning occurs when someone swallows asphalt. If hot asphalt gets on the skin, serious injury can occur.  This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substances in asphalt that can be harmful are: Hydrocarbons Industrial glues Industrial solvents Tar Where Found 
 
 Asphalt is found in: Road paving materials Roofing materials Tile cements Asphalt may also be used for other purposes. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of asphalt poisoning in different parts of the body. BLOOD Severe change in acid levels in the blood EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns of the food pipe (esophagus) Blockage in the intestines Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting (may contain blood) HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure that develops rapidly LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in asphalt) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty) SKIN Burns Irritation Holes in the skin or tissues under the skin Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the person swallowed asphalt, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through vein (by IV) Products to dissolve the asphalt Medicines to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much asphalt they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Hot asphalt cools very quickly and is difficult to get off the skin. Serious burns can easily occur from the extreme heat. Construction workers who work with asphalt should wear protective clothing. Asphalt is hard to swallow, but it may cause serious damage. Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, or stomach. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection.  If asphalt gets in the eye, sores may develop in the cornea, the clear part of the eye. This can cause blindness. Alternative Names 
 
 Asphalt; Pavement References 
 
 Guidotti TL. Hydrogen sulfide. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 91. Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 158. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia