
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumonia is a breathing condition in which there is swelling or an infection of the lungs or large airways.  Aspiration pneumonia occurs when food, saliva, liquids, or vomit is breathed into the lungs or airways leading to the lungs, instead of being swallowed into the esophagus and stomach. Causes 
 
 The type of bacteria that caused the pneumonia depends on: Your health Where you live (at home or in a long-term nursing facility, for example) Whether you were recently hospitalized Your recent antibiotic use Whether your immune system is weakened  Risk factors for breathing in ( aspiration ) of foreign material into the lungs are: Being less alert due to medicines, illness, or other reasons Coma Drinking large amounts of alcohol Receiving medicine to put you into a deep sleep for surgery ( general anesthesia ) Old age Poor gag reflex in people who are not alert (unconscious or semi-conscious) after a stroke or brain injury Problems with swallowing Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest pain Coughing up foul-smelling, greenish or dark phlegm (sputum), or phlegm that contains pus or blood Fatigue Fever Shortness of breath Wheezing Breath odor Excessive sweating Problems swallowing  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination may reveal: Bluish discoloration  of the skin caused by lack of oxygen Crackling sounds in the lungs Decreased oxygen Rapid pulse  (fast heartbeat) Decreased mental awareness  The following tests may also help diagnose this condition: Arterial blood gas Blood culture Bronchoscopy Chest x-ray Complete blood count ( CBC ) CT scan  of the chest Sputum culture Swallowing tests  Treatment 
 
 Some people may need to be hospitalized. Treatment depends on how severe the pneumonia is and how ill the person is before the aspiration (chronic illness). Sometimes a  ventilator (breathing machine)  is needed to support breathing. You will likely receive antibiotics.  You may need to have your swallowing function tested. People who have trouble swallowing may need to use other feeding methods to reduce the risk of aspiration. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on: The health of the person before getting pneumonia The type of bacteria causing the pneumonia How much of the lungs are involved  More severe infections may result in long-term damage to the lungs. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Lung  abscess Shock Spread of infection to the bloodstream ( bacteremia ) Spread of infection to other areas of the body Respiratory failure Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider, go to the emergency room, or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have: Chest pain Chills Fever Shortness of breath Wheezing  Alternative Names 
 
 Anaerobic pneumonia; Aspiration of vomitus; Necrotizing pneumonia; Aspiration pneumonitis Images 
 
 
 Pneumococci organism 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Musher D. Overview of pneumonia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 97. Torres A, Menendez R, Wunderink R. Bacterial pneumonia and lung abscess. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al., eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
 Aerobic bacteria 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Anaerobic bacteria 
 Aspiration 
 Esophageal stricture - benign 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Shock 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia