
 Asthma - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Asthma  is a disease that causes the airways to swell and get narrow. It leads to wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and coughing. Causes 
 
 Asthma is caused by swelling (inflammation) in the airways. During an asthma attack, the muscles surrounding the airways tighten. The lining of the air passages swells. Less air is able to pass through as a result. Asthma is often seen in children. It is a leading cause of missed school days and hospital visits for children. An allergic reaction is a key part of asthma in children.  Asthma and allergies  often occur together. In children who have sensitive airways, asthma symptoms can be triggered by breathing in substances called  allergens  or  triggers . Common asthma triggers include: Animals (hair or dander) Dust, mold, and pollen Aspirin and other medicines Changes in weather (most often cold weather) Chemicals in the air or in food Tobacco smoke Exercise Strong emotions Viral infections, such as the common cold  Symptoms 
 
 Breathing problems are common. They can include: Shortness of breath Feeling out of breath Gasping for air Trouble breathing out (exhaling) Breathing faster than normal  When the child is having a hard time breathing, the skin of the chest and neck may suck inward. Other symptoms of asthma in children include: Coughing that sometimes wakes the child up at night (it may be the only symptom). Dark bags under the eyes. Feeling tired. Irritability. Tightness in the chest. A whistling sound made when breathing ( wheezing ). You may notice it more when the child breathes out.  Your child's asthma symptoms may vary. Symptoms may appear often or develop only when triggers are present. Some children are more likely to have asthma symptoms at night. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will use a stethoscope to listen to the child's lungs. The provider may be able to hear asthma sounds. However, lung sounds are often normal when the child is not having an  asthma episode . The provider will have the child breathe into a device called a  peak flow meter . Peak flow meters can tell how well the child can blow air out of the lungs. If the airways are narrow due to asthma, peak flow values drop. You and your child will learn to measure peak flow at home. Tests may include: Allergy testing on the  skin , or a  blood test  to see if your child is allergic to certain substances Chest x-ray Lung function tests Treatment 
 
 You and your child's providers should work together as a team to create and carry out an asthma action plan.  This plan will tell you how to: Avoid asthma triggers Monitor symptoms Measure peak flow Take medicines  The plan should also tell you when to call the provider. It is important to know what  questions to ask your child's provider . Children with asthma need a lot of  support at school . Give the school staff your asthma action plan so they know how to take care of your child's asthma. Find out how to let your child take medicine during school hours. (You may need to sign a consent form.) Having asthma does not mean your child cannot exercise. Coaches, gym teachers, and your child should know what to do if your child has asthma  symptoms caused by exercise .  ASTHMA MEDICINES There are two basic kinds of medicine used to treat asthma.  Long-term control drugs are taken every day to prevent asthma symptoms. Your child should take these medicines even if no symptoms are present. Some children may need more than one long-term control medicine. Types of long-term  control medicines  include: Inhaled steroids (these are usually the first choice of treatment) Long-acting bronchodilators (these are almost always used with inhaled steroids) Leukotriene inhibitors Cromolyn sodium  Quick relief  or rescue asthma drugs work fast to control asthma symptoms. Children take them when they are coughing, wheezing, having trouble breathing, or having an asthma attack. Some of your child's asthma medicines can be taken using an  inhaler . Children who use an inhaler should use a  spacer device . This helps them get the medicine into the lungs properly. If your child uses the inhaler the wrong way, less medicine gets into the lungs. Have your provider show your child how to correctly use an inhaler. Younger children can use a  nebulizer  instead of an inhaler to take their medicine. A nebulizer turns asthma medicine into a mist.  GETTING RID OF TRIGGERS It is important to know your child's asthma triggers. Avoiding them is the first step toward helping your child feel better. Keep pets outdoors, or at least away from the child's bedroom. No one should  smoke  in a house or around a child with asthma.  Getting rid of tobacco smoke in the home is the single most important thing a family can do to help a child with asthma. Smoking outside the house is not enough. Family members and visitors who smoke carry the smoke inside on their clothes and hair. This can trigger asthma symptoms. DO NOT use indoor fireplaces.  Keep the house clean. Keep food in containers and out of bedrooms. This helps reduce the possibility of cockroaches, which can trigger asthma attacks. Cleaning products in the home should be unscented. MONITOR YOUR CHILD'S ASTHMA Checking peak flow is one of the best ways to control asthma. It can help you keep your child's asthma from getting worse. Asthma attacks usually DO NOT happen without warning. Children under age 5 may not be able to  use a peak flow meter  well enough for it to be helpful. However, a child should start using the peak flow meter at a young age to get used to it. An adult should always watch for a child's asthma symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With proper treatment, most children with asthma can live a normal life. When asthma is not well controlled, it can lead to missed school, problems playing sports, missed work for parents, and many visits to the doctor's office and emergency room. Asthma symptoms often lessen or go away completely as the child gets older. Asthma that is not well controlled can lead to lasting lung problems. In rare cases, asthma is a life-threatening disease. Families need to work closely with their providers to develop a plan to care for a child with asthma. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your child's provider if you think your child has new symptoms of asthma. If your child has been diagnosed with asthma, call the provider: After an emergency room visit When peak flow numbers have been getting lower When symptoms get more frequent and more severe, even though your child is following the asthma action plan  If your child is having trouble breathing or having an asthma attack, get medical help right away. Emergency symptoms  include: Difficulty breathing Bluish color to the lips and face Severe anxiety due to shortness of breath Rapid pulse Sweating Decreased level of alertness, such as severe drowsiness or confusion  A child who is having a severe asthma attack may need to stay in the hospital and get oxygen and medicines through a vein (intravenous line or IV). Alternative Names 
 
 Pediatric asthma; Asthma - pediatric; Wheezing - asthma - children Images 
 
 
 Normal versus asthmatic bronchiole 
 Peak flow meter 
 Lungs 
 Common asthma triggers 
 References 
 
 Jackson DJ, Lemanske RF, Guilbert TW. Management of asthma in infants and children. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 53. Lugogo N, Que LG, Gilstrap DL, Kraft M. Asthma: clinical diagnosis and management. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 42. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Rockville, MD. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, US Dept of Health and Human Services; 2007. NIH publications 08-4051. Updated April 2012.  www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.htm . Accessed June 10, 2015. Read More 
 
 Asthma 
 Lung plethysmography 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Asthma and school 
 Asthma - control drugs 
 Asthma - quick-relief drugs  
 Asthma - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Exercise-induced asthma 
 Exercising and asthma at school  
 How to use a nebulizer 
 How to use an inhaler - no spacer 
 How to use an inhaler - with spacer 
 How to use your peak flow meter 
 Make peak flow a habit! 
 Signs of an asthma attack 
 Stay away from asthma triggers 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Asthma in Children 
 Browse the Encyclopedia