
 Ataxia - telangiectasia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare childhood disease. It affects the brain and other parts of the body. Ataxia refers to uncoordinated movements, such as walking. Telangiectasias are enlarged blood vessels (capillaries) just below the surface of the skin. Telangiectasias appear as tiny, red, spider-like veins. Causes 
 
 Ataxia-telangiectasia is inherited. This means it is passed down through families. It is an  autosomal recessive  trait. Both parents must provide a copy of a nonworking gene for the child to have symptoms of the disorder. The disease results from defects in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. Defects in this gene can lead to abnormal cell death around the body, including the part of the brain that helps coordinate movement. Boys and girls are equally affected. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Decreased coordination of movements (ataxia) in late childhood that can include ataxic gait (cerebellar  ataxia ), jerky gait, unsteadiness  Decreasing mental development, slows or stops after age 10 to 12 Delayed walking Discoloration of skin areas exposed to sunlight Discoloration of skin (coffee-with-milk-colored spots) Enlarged blood vessels in skin of nose, ears, and inside of the elbow and knee Enlarged blood vessels in the whites of the eyes Jerky or abnormal eye movements ( nystagmus ) late in the disease Premature graying of the hair Seizures Sensitivity to radiation, including x-rays Severe respiratory infections that keep coming back (recurring)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. The exam may show signs of the following: Tonsils, lymph nodes, and spleen below normal size Decreased to absent deep tendon reflexes Delayed or absent physical and sexual development Growth failure Mask-like face Multiple skin coloring and texture changes  Possible tests include: Alpha fetoprotein B and T cell screen Carcinoembryonic antigen Genetic testing to look for mutations in the ATM gene Glucose tolerance test Serum immunoglobulin levels (IgE, IgA) X-rays to look at the size of the thymus gland  Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for ataxia-telangiectasia. Treatment is directed at specific symptoms. Support Groups 
 
 Ataxia Telangiectasia Children's Project:  www.atcp.org National Ataxia Foundation (NAF):  www.ataxia.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Early death is common, but life expectancy varies.  Because people with this condition are very sensitive to radiation, they should never be given radiation therapy, and no unnecessary x-rays should be done. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cancer, such as  lymphoma Diabetes Kyphosis Progressive movement disorder that leads to wheelchair use Scoliosis Severe, recurrent  lung infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child develops symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Couples with a family history of this condition who are considering pregnancy may consider genetic counseling. Parents of a child with this disorder may have a slight increased risk for cancer. They should have genetic counseling and increased cancer screenings. Alternative Names 
 
 Louis-Bar syndrome Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Gatti R. Ataxia-telangiectasia.  GeneReviews . Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2010:3. Accessed August 1, 2015.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301790 . Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Kyphosis 
 Pulmonary angiography 
 Scoliosis 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ataxia Telangiectasia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia