
 Atelectasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Atelectasis is the collapse of part or, much less commonly, all of a lung. Causes 
 
 Atelectasis is caused by a blockage of the air passages (bronchus or bronchioles) or by pressure on the outside of the lung. Atelectasis is not the same as another type of collapsed lung called  pneumothorax , which occurs when air escapes from the lung. The air then fills the space outside of the lung, between the lung and chest wall. Atelectasis is common after surgery or in people who were in the hospital. Risk factors for developing atelectasis include: Anesthesia Use of a  breathing tube Foreign object in the airway (most common in children) Lung diseases Mucus that plugs the airway Pressure on the lung caused by a buildup of fluid between the ribs and the lungs (called a  pleural effusion ) Prolonged bed rest with few changes in position Shallow breathing (may be caused by painful breathing) Tumors  that block an airway Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Breathing difficulty Chest pain Cough There are no symptoms if atelectasis is mild. Exams and Tests 
 
 To confirm if you have atelectasis, the following tests will likely be done to view the lungs and airways: Bronchoscopy Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to re-expand the collapsed lung tissue. If fluid is putting pressure on the lung, removing the fluid may allow the lung to expand. Treatments include one or more of the following: Clap ( percussion ) on the chest to loosen mucus plugs in the airway. Deep breathing exercises (with the help of  incentive spirometry devices ). Remove or relieve any blockage in the airways by  bronchoscopy . Tilt the person so the head is lower than the chest (called postural drainage). This allows mucus to drain more easily. Treat a tumor or other condition. Turn the person to lie on the healthy side, allowing the collapsed area of lung to re-expand. Use inhaled medicines to open the airway. Use other devices that help increase positive pressure in the airways and clear fluids. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In an adult, atelectasis in a small area of the lung is usually not life threatening. The rest of the lung can make up for the collapsed area, bringing in enough oxygen for the body to function. Large areas of atelectasis may be life threatening, often in a baby or small child, or in someone who has another lung disease or illness. The collapsed lung usually reinflates slowly if the airway blockage has been removed. Scarring or damage may remain. The outlook depends on the underlying disease. For example, people with extensive cancer often don't do well, while those with simple atelectasis after surgery have a very good outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Pneumonia  may develop quickly after atelectasis in the affected part of the lung. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you develop symptoms of atelectasis. Prevention 
 
 To prevent atelectasis: Encourage movement and deep breathing in anyone who is bedridden for long periods. Keep small objects out of the reach of young children. Maintain deep breathing after anesthesia. Alternative Names 
 
 Partial lung collapse  Images 
 
 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 O'Donnell AE. Bronchiectasis, atelectasis, cysts, and localized lung disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 90. Rozenfeld RA. Atelectasis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 408. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulties - first aid 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 Lung disease 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Collapsed Lung 
 Browse the Encyclopedia