
 Atrial myxoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An atrial myxoma is a noncancerous tumor in the upper left or right side of the heart. It most often grows on the wall that separates the two sides of the heart. This wall is called the atrial septum.  Causes 
 
 A myxoma is a primary heart (cardiac) tumor. This means that the tumor started within the heart. Most heart tumors start somewhere else. Primary cardiac tumors are rare. Myxomas are the most common type of these rare tumors. About 75% of myxomas occur in the left atrium of the heart. They most often begin in the wall that divides the two upper chambers of the heart. The rest are in the right atrium. Right atrial myxomas are sometimes linked with tricuspid stenosis and  atrial fibrillation . Myxomas are more common in women. About 1 in 10 myxomas are passed down through families (inherited). These tumors are called familial myxomas. They tend to occur in more than one part of the heart at a time, and often cause symptoms at a younger age. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may occur at any time, but often they go along with a change in body position.  Symptoms of a myxoma may include: Breathing difficulty when lying flat  or on one side or the other Breathing difficulty when asleep Chest pain  or tightness Dizziness Fainting Sensation of feeling your heart beat ( palpitations ) Shortness of breath  with activity  The symptoms and signs of left atrial myxomas often mimic  mitral stenosis  (narrowing of the valve between the left atrium and the left ventricle). Right atrial myxomas rarely produce symptoms until they have grown to be quite large (5 inches wide, or 13 cm).  Other symptoms may include: Blueness of skin , especially on the fingers (Raynaud phenomenon) Cough Curvature of nails accompanied by soft tissue swelling ( clubbing ) of the fingers Fever Fingers that change color upon pressure  or with cold or  stress General discomfort ( malaise ) Joint pain Swelling in any part of the body Weight loss without trying  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and listen to your heart through a stethoscope. Abnormal heart sounds or a murmur may be heard. These sounds may change when you change body position. Imaging tests may include: Chest x-ray CT scan of chest ECG Echocardiogram Doppler study Heart MRI Left heart angiography Right heart angiography You may also need blood tests including: Complete blood count  (CBC) - may show  anemia  and increased white blood cells Erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) - may be increased  Treatment 
 
 Surgery is needed to remove the tumor, especially if it is causing heart failure symptoms or an  embolism . Some people will also need the mitral valve replaced. This can be done during the same surgery. Myxomas may come back if surgery does not remove all of the tumor cells. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A myxoma is not cancer, but complications are common.  Untreated, a myxoma can lead to an  embolism  (tumor cells or a clot that breaks off and travels in the bloodstream). This can lead to a blockage of blood flow or even cause the tumor to grow in another part of the body. Pieces of the tumor can move to the brain, eye, or limbs. If the tumor grows inside the heart, it can block blood flow. This may require emergency surgery to prevent sudden death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Arrhythmias Pulmonary edema Peripheral  emboli Spread ( metastasis ) of the tumor Blockage of the mitral heart valve  Alternative Names 
 
 Cardiac tumor - myxoma; Heart tumor - myxoma Images 
 
 
 Left atrial myxoma 
 Right atrial myxoma 
 References 
 
 Lenihan DJ, Yusuf SW. Tumors affecting the cardiovascular system. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 85. McKenna WJ, Elliott P. Diseases of the myocardium and endocardium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Arterial embolism 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Heart Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia