
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter is a common type of abnormal heartbeat. The heart rhythm is fast and most often irregular.  Causes 
 
 When working well, the 4 chambers of the heart contract (squeeze) in an organized way. Electrical signals direct your heart to pump the right amount of blood for your body's needs. The signals begin in an area called the sinoatrial node (also called the sinus node or SA node). In atrial fibrillation, the electrical impulse of the heart is not regular. This is because the sinoatrial node no longer controls the heart rhythm.  Parts of the heart cannot contract in an organized pattern. As a result, the heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the body's needs.  In atrial flutter, the ventricles (lower heart chambers) may beat very rapidly, but in a regular pattern.  These problems can affect both men and women. They become more common with increasing age. Common causes of atrial fibrillation include: Alcohol use (especially binge drinking) Coronary artery disease Heart attack or heart bypass surgery Heart failure  or an enlarged heart Heart valve disease (most often the mitral valve) Hypertension Medicines Overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ) Pericarditis Sick sinus syndrome Symptoms 
 
 You may not be aware that your heart is not beating in a normal pattern.  Symptoms may start or stop suddenly. This is because atrial fibrillation may stop or start on its own.  Symptoms may include: Pulse  that feels rapid, racing, pounding, fluttering, irregular, or too slow Sensation of feeling the heart beat ( palpitations ) Confusion Dizziness , lightheadedness Fainting Fatigue Loss of ability to exercise Shortness of breath  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may hear a fast heartbeat while listening to your heart with a stethoscope. Your pulse may feel fast, uneven, or both. The normal heart rate is 60 to 100 beats per minute. In atrial fibrillation or flutter, the heart rate may be 100 to 175 beats per minute. Blood pressure may be normal or low. An  ECG  (a test that records the electrical activity of the heart) may show atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. If your abnormal heart rhythm comes and goes, you may need to wear a special monitor to diagnose the problem. The monitor records the heart's rhythms over a period of time. Event monitor (3 to 4 weeks) Holter monitor  (24-hour test) Implanted loop recorder (extended monitoring)  Tests to find heart disease may include: Echocardiogram (ultrasound imaging of the heart) Tests to examine the blood supply of the heart muscle Tests to study the heart's electrical system Treatment 
 
 Cardioversion treatment is used to get the heart back into a normal rhythm right away. There are two options for treatment:  Electric shocks to your heart Drugs given through a vein  These treatments may be done as emergency methods, or planned ahead of time. Daily medicines taken by mouth are used to: Slow the irregular heartbeat.  These drugs may include beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and digoxin. Prevent atrial fibrillation from coming back.  These drugs work well in many people, but they can have serious side effects. Atrial fibrillation returns in many people, even while they are taking these medicines.  Blood thinners  are medicines that are used to reduce the risk of developing a blood clot that travels in the body (and that can cause a stroke, for example). They include  heparin ,  warfarin  (Coumadin), apixaban (Eliquis), rivaroxaban (Xarelto), and dabigatran (Pradaxa). These drugs increase the chance of bleeding, so not everyone can use them. Antiplatelet drugs such as  aspirin  or  clopidogrel  may also be prescribed. Your provider will consider your age and other medical problems when deciding which drugs are best. A procedure called  radiofrequency ablation  can be used to scar areas in your heart where the heart rhythm problems are triggered. This can prevent the abnormal electrical signals that cause atrial fibrillation or flutter from moving through the heart. You may need a heart  pacemaker  after this procedure. All people with atrial fibrillation will need to learn how to  manage this condition at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treatment can often control this disorder. Many people with atrial fibrillation do very well. Atrial fibrillation tends to return and get worse. It may come back, even with treatment. Clots that break off and travel to the brain can cause a  stroke . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of atrial fibrillation or flutter. Prevention 
 
 Talk to your provider about steps to treat conditions that cause atrial fibrillation and flutter. Avoid binge drinking. Alternative Names 
 
 Auricular fibrillation; A-fib; Afib Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Posterior heart arteries 
 Anterior heart arteries 
 Conduction system of the heart 
 References 
 
 January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.  Circulation . 2014;130(23):2071-2104. PMID: 24682348  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24682348 .  Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et al. Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.  Stroke . 2014;45(12):3754-3832. PMID: 25355838  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25355838 . Morady F, Zipes DP. Atrial fibrillation: clinical features, mechanisms, and management. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 38. Olgin JE, Zipes DP. Specific arrhythmias: diagnosis and treatment. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 37. Zimetbaum P. Cardiac arrhythmia with supraventricular origin. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Atrial myxoma 
 Blood clots 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Heart attack 
 Heart pacemaker 
 High blood pressure 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Pericarditis 
 Pulse 
 Stable angina 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Atrial fibrillation - discharge  
 Heart pacemaker - discharge 
 Taking warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arrhythmia 
 Atrial Fibrillation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia