
 Autonomic neuropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Autonomic neuropathy is a group of symptoms that occur when there is damage to the nerves that manage every day body functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, bowel and bladder emptying, and digestion. Causes 
 
 Autonomic neuropathy is a group of symptoms, not a specific disease. There are many causes. Autonomic neuropathy involves damage to the nerves that carry information from the brain and spinal cord to the heart, blood vessels, bladder, intestines, sweat glands, and pupils. Autonomic neuropathy may be seen with: Alcohol abuse Diabetes  (diabetic neuropathy) Disorders involving scarring of tissues around the nerves Guillain Barre syndrome  or other diseases that inflame nerves HIV and  AIDS Inherited nerve disorders Multiple sclerosis Parkinson disease Spinal cord injury Surgery or injury involving the nerves  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary depending on the nerves affected. They usually develop gradually over years.  Stomach and intestine symptoms may include: Constipation (hard stools) Diarrhea (loose stools) Feeling full after only a few bites ( early satiety ) Nausea after eating Problems controlling bowel movements Swallowing problems Swollen abdomen Vomiting of undigested food  Heart and lungs symptoms may include: Abnormal heart rate or rhythm Blood pressure changes with position that causes dizziness when standing High blood pressure Shortness of breath with activity or exercise  Bladder symptoms may include: Difficulty beginning to urinate Feeling of incomplete bladder emptying Leaking urine  Other symptoms may include: Sweating too much or not enough Heat intolerance  brought on with activity and exercise Sexual problems including erection problems in men and vaginal dryness and orgasm difficulties in women Small pupil in one eye Weight loss without trying  Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs of autonomic nerve damage are not always seen when your doctor examines you. Your blood pressure or heart rate may change when lying down, sitting, or standing.  Special tests to measure sweating and heart rate may be done. This is called autonomic testing. Other tests depend on what type of symptoms you have.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment to reverse nerve damage is most often not possible. As a result, treatment and self-care are focused on managing your symptoms and preventing further problems. Your doctor may recommend:  Extra salt in the diet or taking salt tablets to increase fluid volume in blood vessels Fludrocortisone or similar medicines to help your body retain salt and fluid Medicines to treat irregular heart rhythms Pacemaker Sleeping with the head raised Wearing elastic stockings  The following may help your intestines and stomach work better: Daily bowel care program Medicines that help the stomach move food through faster Sleeping with the head raised Small, frequent meals  Medicines and self-care programs can help you if you have:  Urinary incontinence Neurogenic bladder Erection problems  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do will depend on the cause of the problem and if it can be treated.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your doctor if you have symptoms of autonomic neuropathy. Early symptoms might include: Becoming faint or lightheaded when standing Changes in bowel, bladder, or sexual function Unexplained nausea and vomiting when eating  Early diagnosis and treatment may control symptoms. Autonomic neuropathy may hide the warning signs of a heart attack. Instead of feeling chest pain, if you have autonomic neuropathy, you may only feel sudden fatigue, sweating, shortness of breath, nausea, and vomiting during a heart attack. Prevention 
 
 Preventing or controlling disorders associated with autonomic neuropathy may reduce the risk related to the disorder. For example, people with diabetes should closely control  blood sugar levels .  Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - autonomic; Autonomic nerve disease Images 
 
 
 Autonomic Nerves 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Chelimsky T, Robertson D, Chelimsky G. Disorders of the autonomic nervous system. In: Daroff:  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA; Elsevier; 2012: chap 77. Cheshir WP. Autonomic disorders and their management. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 427. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Central nervous system 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Electrolytes 
 Low potassium level 
 Parkinson disease 
 Peripheral 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Ulcers 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, M.D., Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autonomic Nervous System Disorders 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia