
 Avian influenza 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Avian influenza A viruses cause the  flu  infection in birds. The viruses that cause the disease in birds can change (mutate) so it can spread to humans. Causes 
 
 The first avian influenza in humans was reported in Hong Kong in 1997. It was called avian influenza (H5N1). The outbreak was linked to chickens. Since then there have been human cases of avian influenza A in Asia, Africa, Europe, Indonesia, Vietnam, the Pacific, and the near East. Hundreds of people have become sick with this virus. Up to half of the people who get this virus die from the illness. The chance of a worldwide outbreak in humans goes up the more the avian flu virus spreads. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports 21 states with avian flu in birds and no infections in humans as of August 2015. Most of these infections have occurred in both backyard and commercial poultry flocks. These recent HPAI H5 viruses have not infected any people in the United States, Canada, or internationally. The risk for infection in people is low.  Your risk of getting the bird flu virus is higher if:  You work with poultry (such as farmers). You travel to countries where the virus is present. You touch an infected bird. You go into a building with sick or dead birds, feces, or litter from infected birds. You eat raw or undercooked poultry meat, eggs, or blood from infected birds.  No one has gotten avian flu virus from eating properly cooked poultry or poultry products. Health care workers and people who live in the same house as people with bird flu may also be at higher risk for infection.  Avian flu viruses can live in the environment for long periods of time. Infection may be spread just by touching surfaces that have the virus on them. Birds who were infected with the flu can give off the virus in their feces and saliva for as long as 10 days. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of avian flu infection in humans depend on the strain of virus. The avian influenza virus in humans causes typical flu-like symptoms, such as:  Cough Diarrhea Trouble breathing Fever  greater than 100.4°F (38°C) Headache General ill feeling  (malaise) Muscle aches Runny nose Sore throat  Exams and Tests 
 
 If you think you have been exposed to the virus, call your health care provider before your office visit. This will give the staff a chance to take steps to protect themselves and other people during your office visit. There are tests for the avian flu, but they are not widely available. One type of test can give results in about 4 hours. Your provider might also do the following tests: Listening to the lungs  (to detect abnormal breath sounds) Chest x-ray Culture from the nose or throat A method or technique to detect the virus, called RT-PCR White blood cell count Other tests may be done to look at how well your heart, kidneys, and liver are working.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment varies, and is based on your symptoms. In general, treatment with the antiviral medicine oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) may make the disease less severe. For the medicine to work, you need to start taking it within 48 hours after your symptoms start. Oseltamivir may also be prescribed for people who live in the same house people with avian flu. This may prevent them from getting the illness. The virus that causes human avian flu is resistant to the antiviral medicines amantadine and rimantadine. These medicines should not be used in the case of an H5N1 outbreak. People with severe infection may need to be placed on a breathing machine. People infected with the virus also should be kept separate from non-infected people.  Providers recommend that people get an influenza (flu) shot. This may cut down the chance that the avian flu virus will mix with a human flu virus. This might create a new virus that may easily spread. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the type of avian flu virus and how bad the infection is. The disease can be fatal.
 Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute respiratory failure Organ failure Pneumonia Sepsis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop flu-like symptoms within 10 days of handling infected birds or being in an area with a known avian flu outbreak. Prevention 
 
 There is an approved vaccine to protect humans from the H5N1avian flu virus. This vaccine could be used if the current H5N1 virus starts spreading among people. The US government keeps a stockpile of vaccine. At this time, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) does not recommend against travel to countries affected by avian influenza. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention makes the following recommendations. As a general precaution: Avoid wild birds and watch them only from a distance. Avoid touching sick birds and surfaces that may be covered in their feces. Use protective clothing and special breathing masks if you work with birds or if you go into buildings with sick or dead birds, feces, or litter from infected birds. If you have had contact with infected birds, watch for signs of infection. If you do become infected, tell your doctor. Avoid undercooked or uncooked meat. This reduces the risk for exposure to avian flu and other foodborne diseases.  If traveling to other countries: Avoid visits to live-bird markets and poultry farms. Avoid preparing or eating undercooked poultry products. See your provider if you become sick after you return from your trip.  Current information regarding avian flu is available at:  www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/avian-in-humans.htm . Alternative Names 
 
 Bird flu; H5N1; H5N2; H5N8; H7N9; Avian influenza A (HPAI) H5 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD). Avian influenza A virus infection in humans. Last reviewed: December 11, 2015. Accessed: January 20, 2016.  www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/avian-in-humans.htm . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD). H5 Viruses in the United States. Last reviewed: August 4, 2015. Accessed: January 20, 2016.  www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/h5/index.htm . Hayden FG. Influenza. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 364. Levin S, Singh K. Zoonoses. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 328. Read More 
 
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
 Flu 
 H1N1 influenza (Swine flu) 
 Immune response 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Sepsis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bird Flu 
 Browse the Encyclopedia