
 Axillary nerve dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Axillary nerve dysfunction is nerve damage that leads to a loss of movement or sensation in the shoulder. Causes 
 
 Axillary nerve dysfunction is a form of  peripheral neuropathy . It occurs when there is damage to the axillary nerve. This is the nerve that helps control the deltoid muscles of the shoulder and the skin around it. A problem with just one nerve, such as the axillary nerve, is called  mononeuropathy . The usual causes are: Direct injury Long-term pressure on the nerve Pressure on the nerve from nearby body structures Shoulder injury  Entrapment creates pressure on the nerve where it passes through a narrow structure. The damage can destroy the myelin sheath that covers the nerve or part of the nerve cell (the axon). Damage of either type reduces or prevents the movement of signals through the nerve. Conditions that can lead to axillary nerve dysfunction include: Body-wide (systemic) disorders that cause nerve inflammation Deep infection Fracture  of the upper arm bone (humerus) Pressure from casts or  splints Improper use of crutches Shoulder dislocation  In some cases, no cause can be found. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Numbness  over part of the outer shoulder Shoulder  weakness , especially when lifting the arm up and away from the body  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine your neck, arm, and shoulder. Weakness of the shoulder can cause difficulty moving your arm. The deltoid muscle of the shoulder may show signs of  muscle atrophy . Tests that may be used to check axillary nerve dysfunction include: EMG  and nerve conduction tests, will be normal right after the injury and should be done several weeks after the injury or symptoms start MRI  or x-rays of the shoulder  Treatment 
 
 Depending on the cause of the nerve disorder, some people do not need treatment. The problem gets better on its own. The rate of recovery can be different for everyone. It can take many months to recover. Anti-inflammatory medicines may be given if you have: Sudden symptoms Small changes in sensation or movement No history of injury to the area No signs of nerve damage  These medicines reduce swelling and pressure on the nerve. They may be injected directly into the area or taken by mouth. Other medicines include: Over-the-counter pain medicines may be helpful for mild pain (neuralgia). Other medicines may reduce stabbing pain. Opiate pain relievers may be needed to control severe pain.  If your symptoms continue or get worse, you may need surgery. If a trapped nerve is causing your symptoms, surgery to release the nerve may help you feel better. Physical therapy can help maintain muscle strength. Job changes, muscle retraining, or other forms of therapy may be recommended. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 It may be possible to make a full recovery if the cause of the axillary nerve dysfunction can be identified and successfully treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity of the arm, shoulder  contracture , or frozen shoulder Partial  loss of sensation  in the arm (uncommon) Partial shoulder  paralysis Repeated injury to the arm  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms of axillary nerve dysfunction. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of controlling symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Preventive measures vary, depending on the cause. Avoid putting pressure on the underarm area for long periods. Make sure casts,  splints , and other appliances fit properly. When you use crutches, learn how to avoid putting pressure on the underarm. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - axillary nerve Images 
 
 
 Damaged axillary nerve 
 References 
 
 Steinmann SP, Spinner RJ. Nerve problems about the shoulder. In: Rockwood CA, Matsen FA III, Wirth MA, et al., eds.  The Shoulder . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 27. Taylor KF. Nerve entrapment. In: In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Contracture deformity 
 How to make a splint 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Muscle function loss 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia