
 Baking powder overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Baking powder is a cooking product that helps batter rise. This article discusses the effects of swallowing a large amount of baking powder. Baking powder is considered nontoxic when it is used in cooking and baking. However, serious complications can occur from overdoses or allergic reactions. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Baking powder contains sodium bicarbonate (also found in baking soda) and an acid (such as cream of tartar). It may also contain cornstarch or a similar product to keep it from clumping. Where Found 
 
 The above ingredients are used in baking powder. They may also be found in other products. Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms of a baking powder overdose include: Thirst Abdominal pain Nausea Vomiting  (severe) Diarrhea  (severe)  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so.  If the person can swallow, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give water or milk if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, having convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are not controlled, serious dehydration and body chemical and mineral (electrolyte) imbalances may occur. These can cause heart rhythm disturbances. Alternative Names 
 
 Sodium bicarbonate References 
 
 Thomas SHL, White J. Poisoning. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, et al., eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 9. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia