
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Becker muscular dystrophy is an inherited disorder that involves slowly worsening  muscle weakness  of the legs and pelvis. Causes 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy is very similar to  Duchenne muscular dystrophy . The main difference is that it gets worse at a much slower rate and it is less common. The disorder is passed down through families (inherited). Having a family history of the condition raises your risk. Becker muscular dystrophy occurs in about 3 to 6 out of every 100,000 births. The disease is found mostly in boys. Symptoms 
 
 Females rarely develop symptoms. Males will develop symptoms if they inherit the defective gene. Symptoms most often appear in boys between ages 5 and 15, but may begin later. Muscle weakness of the lower body, including the legs and pelvis area, slowly gets worse, causing: Difficulty walking that gets worse over time; by age 25 to 30, the person is usually unable to walk Frequent falls Difficulty getting up from the floor and climbing stairs Difficulty with running, hopping, and jumping Loss of muscle mass Toe walking Muscle weakness in the arms, neck, and other areas is not as severe as in the lower body  Other symptoms may include: Breathing problems Cognitive problems (these do not get worse over time) Fatigue Loss of balance and coordination  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a nervous system (neurological) and muscle exam. A careful medical history is also important, because symptoms are similar to those of  Duchenne muscular dystrophy. However, Becker muscular dystrophy gets worse much more slowly. An exam may find: Abnormally developed bones, leading to deformities of the chest and back ( scoliosis ) Abnormal heart muscle function ( cardiomyopathy ) Congestive heart failure  or irregular heartbeat ( arrhythmia ) - rare Muscle deformities, including  contractures  of heels and legs, abnormal fat and connective tissue in calf muscles Muscle loss that begins in the legs and pelvis, then moves to the muscles of the shoulders, neck, arms, and respiratory system  Tests that may be done include: CPK  blood test Electromyography ( EMG ) nerve testing Muscle biopsy  or genetic blood test  Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for Becker muscular dystrophy. However there are many new drugs currently undergoing clinical testing that show significant promise in treating the disease.The current goal of treatment is to control symptoms to maximize the person's quality of life. Some providers prescribe steroids to help keep a patient walking for as long as possible. Activity is encouraged. Inactivity (such as bed rest) can make the muscle disease worse. Physical therapy may be helpful to maintain muscle strength. Orthopedic appliances such as braces and wheelchairs may improve movement and self-care. Genetic counseling may be recommended. Daughters of a man with Becker muscular dystrophy may carry the defective gene and could pass it on to their sons. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the  stress  of the illness by joining a  muscular dystrophy support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy leads to slowly worsening disability. However, the amount of disability varies. Some people may need a wheelchair. Others may only need to use walking aids such as canes or braces.  Lifespan is most often shortened if there are heart and breathing problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Heart-related problems such as cardiomyopathy Lung failure Pneumonia  or other  respiratory  infections Increasing and permanent disability that leads to decreased ability to care for self, decreased mobility  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Symptoms of Becker muscular dystrophy appear A person with Becker muscular dystrophy develops new symptoms (particularly  fever  with  cough  or  breathing difficulties ) You are planning to start a family and you or other family members have been diagnosed with Becker muscular dystrophy Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be advised if there is a family history of Becker muscular dystrophy. Alternative Names 
 
 Benign pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy; Becker's dystrophy Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Amato AA. Disorders of the skeletal muscle. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 110. Sarnat HB. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 609. Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 421. Read More 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 Intellectual disability 
 Muscle atrophy 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscular Dystrophy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia