
 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is a growth disorder that causes large body size, large organs, and other symptoms. It is a congenital condition, which means it is present at birth. The signs and symptoms of the disorder vary somewhat from child to child. Infancy can be a critical period in babies with this condition because of the possibility of: Low blood sugar A type of hernia called an omphalocele (when present) An enlarged tongue (macroglossia) An increased rate of  tumor  growth.  Wilms tumors  and hepatoblastomas are the most common tumors in children with this syndrome.  Causes 
 
 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is caused by a defect in the genes on  chromosome  11. About 10% of cases can be passed down through families.  Symptoms 
 
 Signs and symptoms of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome include: Large size for a newborn Red birth mark on forehead or eyelids ( Nevus flammeus ) Creases in ear lobes Large tongue (macroglossia) Low blood sugar Abdominal wall defect ( umbilical hernia  or  omphalocele ) Enlargement of some organs Overgrowth of one side of the body (hemihyperplasia/hemihypertrophy) Tumor growth, such as Wilms tumors and hepatoblastomas  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam to look for signs and symptoms of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Often this is enough to make a diagnosis.  Tests for the disorder include: Blood tests for low blood sugar Chromosomal studies for abnormalities in chromosome 11 Ultrasound of the abdomen Treatment 
 
 Infants with low blood sugar may be treated with fluids given through a vein ( intravenous , IV). Some infants may need medicine or other management if low blood sugar continues. Defects in the abdominal wall may need to be repaired. If the enlarged tongue makes it hard to breath or eat, surgery may be needed, Children with overgrowth on one side of the body should be watched for a curved spine ( scoliosis ). The child also must be watched closely for the development of tumors. Tumor screening includes blood tests and abdominal ultrasounds. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Children with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome typically lead normal lives. Further study is needed to develop long-term follow-up information.  Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Development of tumors Feeding problems due to enlarged tongue Breathing problems due to enlarged tongue Scoliosis due to hemihypertrophy  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have a child with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and worrisome symptoms develop, call your pediatrician right away. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Genetic counseling may be of value for families who would like to have more children. Images 
 
 
 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 
 References 
 
 Jones KL, Jones M, Del Campo M, eds.  Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation . 7th ed. Elsevier Saunders; Philadelphia, PA; 2015:218-22. Stevenson RE, Hall JG, Everman DB, Soloman BS, eds.  Human Malformations and Related Anomalies . 3rd Edition. Oxford University Press. New York, NY, 2015:888-91. Read More 
 
 Abdominal thrusts 
 Chromosome 
 Cushing syndrome due to adrenal tumor 
 Low blood sugar 
 Macroglossia 
 Macrosomia 
 Omphalocele 
 Tumor 
 Umbilical hernia 
 Visceromegaly 
 Wilms tumor 
 
 Review Date 3/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer M. Kalish, MD, PhD, Attending Physician, Division of Human Genetics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Growth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia