
 Belching 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Belching is the act of bringing up air from the stomach. Considerations 
 
 Belching is most often a normal process. The purpose of belching is to release air from the stomach. Every time you swallow, you also swallow air, along with fluid or food. The buildup of air in the upper stomach causes the stomach to stretch. This triggers the muscle at the lower end of the esophagus (the tube that runs from your mouth to the stomach) to relax. Air is allowed to escape up the esophagus and out the mouth. Depending on the cause, belching may last longer or be more forceful. Symptoms such as nausea,  dyspepsia , and  heartburn  may be relieved by belching. Causes 
 
 Belching may be due to: Pressure caused by the unconscious swallowing of air (aerophasia) Acid reflux disease  (GERD) and heartburn  Home Care 
 
 You can get relief by lying on your side or in a knee-to-chest position until the gas passes.  Avoid chewing gum, eating quickly, and eating gas-producing foods and beverages. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Most of the time belching is a minor problem. Call a health care provider if the belching does not go away, or if you also have other symptoms. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including: Is this the first time this has occurred? Is there a pattern to your belching? For example, does it happen when you are nervous or after you have been consuming certain foods or drinks? What other symptoms do you have?  You may need more tests based on what the provider finds during your exam and your other symptoms.  Alternative Names 
 
 Burping; Eructation; Gas - belching Images 
 
 
 Baby burping position 
 References 
 
 McQuaid KR. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Read More 
 
 Heartburn 
 Indigestion 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gas 
 Browse the Encyclopedia