
 Benefits of quitting tobacco 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 If you smoke, you should quit. But quitting can be hard. Most people who have quit smoking have tried at least once, without success, in the past. View any past attempts to quit as a learning experience, not a failure. There are many reasons to quit using tobacco. Long-term use of tobacco can increase your  risk of many serious health problems . THE BENEFITS OF QUITTING You may enjoy the following when you quit smoking. Your breath, clothes, and hair will smell better. Your sense of smell will return. Food will taste better. Your fingers and fingernails will slowly appear less yellow. Your stained teeth may slowly become whiter. Your children will be healthier and will be less likely to start smoking. It will be easier and cheaper to find an apartment or hotel room. You may have an easier time getting a job. Friends may be more willing to be in your car or home. It may be easier to find a date. Many people do not smoke and do not like to be around people who smoke. You will save money. If you smoke a pack a day, you spend about $2,000 a year on cigarettes.  HEALTH BENEFITS Some health benefits begin almost immediately. Every week, month, and year without tobacco further improves your health. Within 20 minutes of quitting: Your blood pressure and pulse rate drop to normal and the temperature of your hands and feet increases to normal. Within 8 hours of quitting: Your blood carbon monoxide levels drop and your blood oxygen levels increase to normal levels. Within 24 hours of quitting: Your risk of a sudden heart attack goes down. Within 48 hours of quitting: Your nerve endings begin to regrow. Your senses of smell and taste begin to return to normal. Within 2 weeks to 3 months of quitting: Your circulation improves. Walking becomes easier. Your lungs work better. Wounds heal more quickly. Within 1 to 9 months of quitting: You have more energy. Smoking-related symptoms, such as coughing, nasal congestion, fatigue, and shortness of breath improve. You will have fewer illnesses, colds, and asthma attacks. You will gradually no longer be short of breath with everyday activities. Within 1 year of quitting: Your risk of coronary heart disease is half that of someone still using tobacco. Within 5 years of quitting: Your risk of mouth, throat, esophagus, and bladder cancers are reduced by half. Within 10 years of quitting: Your risk of dying from lung cancer is about one half that of a person who still smokes.  Other health benefits of quitting smoking include:  Lower chance of blood clots in the legs, which may travel to the lungs Lower risk of erectile dysfunction Fewer problems during pregnancy, such as babies born at low birth weight, premature labor, miscarriage, and cleft lip Lower risk of infertility due to damaged sperm Healthier teeth, gums, and skin  Infants and children who you live with will have: Asthma that is easier to control Fewer visits to the emergency room Fewer colds, ear infections, and pneumonia Reduced risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)  MAKING THE DECISION Like any addiction, quitting tobacco is difficult, especially if you do it alone. There are a lot of  ways to quit smoking  and many resources to help you. Talk to your health care provider about nicotine replacement therapy and smoking cessation medications.  If you join  smoking cessation programs , you have a much better chance of success. Such programs are offered by hospitals, health departments, community centers, and work sites.  Alternative Names 
 
 Secondhand smoke; Cigarette smoking - quitting; Tobacco cessation; Smoking and smokeless tobacco - quitting; Why you should quit smoking References 
 
 American Cancer Society. When smokers quit - what are the benefits over time?   www.cancer.org/healthy/stayawayfromtobacco/guidetoquittingsmoking/guide-to-quitting-smoking-benefits .
Last revised 02/06/2014. Accessed 1/29/2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Quitting smoking. Updated May 21, 2015.  www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/cessation/quitting/ . Accessed February 7, 2016. George TP. Nicotine and tobacco. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 32. Patnode CD, O'Connor E, Whitlock EP, et al. Primary care-relevant interventions for tobacco use prevention and cessation in children and adolescents: a systematic evidence review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;158(4):253-260. PMID: 23229625  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23229625 . 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Browse the Encyclopedia