
 Benzene poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Benzene is a clear, liquid, petroleum-based chemical that has a sweet smell. Benzene poisoning occurs when someone swallows, breathes in, or touches benzene. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Benzene can be harmful if it is swallowed, inhaled, or touched. Where Found 
 
 People may be exposed to benzene in factories, refineries, and other industrial settings. Benzene may be found in: Additives to gasoline and diesel fuel Many industrial solvents Various paint,  lacquer , and  varnish  removers Other products may also contain benzene. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of benzene poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Burning sensation in the nose and throat  STOMACH AND INTESTINES  Loss of appetite Nausea  and vomiting  HEART AND BLOOD Irregular heartbeat Rapid heartbeat Shock and collapse  LUNGS AND CHEST Rapid, shallow breathing Tightness in the chest NERVOUS SYSTEM Dizziness Drowsiness Nervousness Convulsions Euphoria (feeling of being drunk) Headache Staggering Tremors Unconsciousness Weakness SKIN Pale  skin Small red dots  on skin  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If benzene is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed benzene, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the benzene, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.  The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Chest x-ray Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through the vein (by IV) Medicines to treat an allergic reaction and other symptoms Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  The person may be admitted to the hospital if the poisoning is severe. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much benzene they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Benzene is very poisonous. Poisoning can cause rapid death. However, deaths have occurred as long as 3 days after the poisoning. This happens because: Permanent brain damage occurs The heart stops The lungs stop working People who have regular exposure to low levels of benzene can also become sick. The most common problems are blood diseases, including: Leukemia Lymphoma Severe anemia People who work with benzene products should only do so in areas with good air flow. They should also wear protective gloves and eye glasses. References 
 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Toxicological profile for benzene. Updated January 21, 2015. Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA. Mirkin DB. Benzene and related aromatic hydrocarbons. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 94. Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 158. 
 Review Date 10/18/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia