
 Bezoar 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bezoar is a ball of swallowed foreign material most often composed of hair or fiber. It collects in the stomach and fails to pass through the intestines. Causes 
 
 Chewing on or eating hair or fuzzy materials (or indigestible materials such as plastic bags) can lead to the formation of a bezoar. The rate is very low. The risk is greater among people with intellectual disability or emotionally disturbed children. Generally, bezoars are mostly seen in females aged 10 to 19. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Indigestion Stomach upset or distress Nausea Vomiting Diarrhea Pain Gastric ulcers Exams and Tests 
 
 The child may have a  lump in the abdomen  that can be felt by the health care provider. A  barium swallow x-ray  will show the mass in the stomach. Sometimes, a scope is used (endoscopy) to directly view the bezoar. Treatment 
 
 The bezoar may need to be surgically removed, especially if it is large. In some cases, small bezoars may be removed through a scope placed through the mouth into the stomach. This is similar to an  EGD  procedure. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Full recovery is expected. Possible Complications 
 
 Persistent vomiting can lead to  dehydration . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you suspect your child has a bezoar. Prevention 
 
 If your child has had a hair bezoar in the past, trim the child's hair short so he or she cannot put the ends in the mouth. Keep indigestible materials away from a child who has a tendency to put items in the mouth. Be sure to remove the child's access to fuzzy or fiber-filled materials. Alternative Names 
 
 Trichobezoar; Hairball References 
 
 Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF. Foreign bodies and bezoars. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 334. Read More 
 
 Dehydration 
 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foreign Bodies 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia