
 Bile duct stricture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bile duct stricture is an abnormal narrowing of the common bile duct, the tube that moves  bile  from the liver to the small intestine. Bile is a substance that helps with digestion. Causes 
 
 A bile duct stricture is often caused by injury to the bile ducts during surgery. For example, it may occur after surgery to remove the gallbladder. Other causes of this condition include: Cancer of the bile duct, liver or pancreas Damage and scarring due to a  gallstone in the bile duct Damage or scarring after gallbladder removal
    Pancreatitis Primary sclerosing cholangitis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal pain 
   on the upper right side of belly Chills Fever Itching Jaundice Nausea and vomiting Pale or clay-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests can help diagnose this condition: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram  (PTC) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) The following blood tests can help reveal a problem with the  biliary system . Alkaline phosphatase  (ALP) is higher than normal. Bilirubin  level is higher than normal. This condition may also alter the results of the following tests: Amylase level Lipase level Urine bilirubin Prothrombin time ( PT ) Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to correct the narrowing so bile can flow from the liver into the intestine. This may involve: Surgery Endoscopic or percutaneous dilation  If surgery is done, the stricture is removed. The common bile duct will be rejoined with the small intestine. In some cases, a tiny metal or plastic mesh tube ( stent ) is placed across the bile duct stricture to keep it open.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treatment is successful most of the time. Long-term success depends on the cause of the stricture. Possible Complications 
 
 Inflammation and narrowing of the biliary duct may return in some people. There is a risk for infection above the narrowed area. Strictures that remain for a long period can lead to liver damage ( cirrhosis ). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms recur after pancreatitis,  cholecystectomy , or other biliary surgery. Alternative Names 
 
 Bile duct stricture; Biliary stricture Images 
 
 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Penman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 23. Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and liver. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Choledocholithiasis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Gallbladder removal - open 
 Gallstones 
 Sclerosing cholangitis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Cancer 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia