
 Bilirubin encephalopathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bilirubin encephalopathy is a rare neurological condition that occurs in some  newborns with severe jaundice . Causes 
 
 Bilirubin encephalopathy (BE) is caused by very high levels of bilirubin. Bilirubin is a yellow pigment that is created as the body gets rid of old red blood cells. High levels of bilirubin in the body can cause the skin to look yellow (jaundice). If the level of bilirubin is very high or a baby is very ill, the substance will move out of the blood and collect in the brain tissue if it is not bound to albumin (protein) in the blood. This can lead to problems such as brain damage and hearing loss. The term "kernicterus" refers to the yellow staining caused by bilirubin. This is seen in parts of the brain on autopsy. This condition most often develops in the first week of life, but may be seen up until the third week. Some newborns with  Rh hemolytic disease  are at high risk for severe jaundice that can lead to this condition. Rarely, BE can develop in seemingly healthy babies. Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms depend on the stage of BE. Not all babies with kernicterus on autopsy have had definite symptoms. Early stage: Extreme jaundice Absent startle reflex Poor feeding or sucking Extreme sleepiness (lethargy) and low muscle tone (hypotonia) Middle stage: High-pitched cry Irritability May have arched back with neck hyperextended backwards, high muscle tone (hypertonia) Poor feeding Late stage: Stupor or coma No feeding Shrill cry Muscle rigidity, markedly arched back with neck hyperextended backwards Seizures Exams and Tests 
 
 A blood test will show a high bilirubin level (greater than 20 to 25 mg/dL). However, there is not a direct link between bilirubin level and degree of injury.  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on how old the baby is (in hours) and whether the baby has any risk factors (such as prematurity). It may include: Light therapy (phototherapy) Exchange transfusions (removing the child's blood and replacing it with fresh donor blood or plasma) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 BE is a serious condition. Many infants with late-stage nervous system complications die. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Permanent brain damage Hearing loss Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help right away if your baby has signs of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Treating jaundice or conditions that may lead to it can help prevent this problem. Infants with the first signs of jaundice have bilirubin level measured within 24 hours. If the level is high, the infant should be screened for diseases that involve the destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis). All newborns have a follow-up appointment within 2 to 3 days after leaving the hospital. This is very important for late preterm or early term babies (born more than 2 to 3 weeks before their due date). Alternative Names 
 
 Bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction (BIND); Kernicterus Images 
 
 
 Kernicterus 
 References 
 
 American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Hospital stay for healthy term newborns.  Pediatrics.  2010; 125: 405. PMID: 20100744  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20100744 . 
  Ruud-Hansen TW. Mechanisms of bilirubin-induced brain injury. In: Polin RA, Fox WW, Abmam SH, eds.  Fetal and Neonatal Physiology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 122. Volpe JJ. Bilirubin-induced brain injury In: Volpe JJ, ed.  Neurology of the Newborn . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2008:chap 13. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Newborn jaundice - discharge 
 Review Date 4/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia