
 Bilirubin - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bilirubin is a yellowish pigment found in  bile , a fluid produced by the liver. This article is about a lab test to measure the amount of bilirubin in the urine. Large amounts of bilirubin in the body can lead to jaundice. Bilirubin may also be measured with a blood test. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test can be done on any urine sample. For an infant, thoroughly wash the area where urine exits the body. Open a urine collection bag (a plastic bag with an adhesive paper on one end). For males, place the entire penis in the bag and attach the adhesive to the skin. For females, place the bag over the labia. Diaper as usual over the secured bag.  This procedure may take a few tries. An active baby can move the bag causing urine to go into the diaper. Check the infant often and change the bag after the infant has urinated into it. Drain the urine from the bag into the container provided by your health care provider. Deliver the sample to the laboratory or to your provider as soon as possible. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without first talking to your provider.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to diagnose liver or gallbladder problems. Normal Results 
 
 Bilirubin is not normally found in the urine. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased levels of bilirubin in the urine may be due to: Biliary tract disease Cirrhosis Gallstones  in the  biliary tract Hepatitis Liver disease Tumors of the liver  or gallbladder  Considerations 
 
 Bilirubin can break down in light. That is why babies with jaundice are sometimes placed under blue fluorescent lamps. Alternative Names 
 
 Conjugated bilirubin - urine; Direct bilirubin - urine Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Berk PD, Korenblat KM. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver test results In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 147. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Bile duct obstruction 
 Bile duct stricture 
 Biliary system 
 Bilirubin blood test 
 Cirrhosis 
 Gallstones 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Jaundice 
 Liver Function Tests 
 Urinalysis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia