
 Bili lights 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bili lights are a type of light therapy (phototherapy) that is used to treat  newborn jaundice . Jaundice is a yellow coloring of the skin and eyes. It is caused by too much of a yellow substance called bilirubin. Bilirubin is created when the body replaces old red blood cells with new ones.  Information 
 
 Phototherapy involves shining fluorescent light from the bili lights on bare skin. A specific wavelength of light can break down bilirubin into a form that the body can get rid of through the urine and stools. The light looks blue.  The newborn is placed under the lights without clothes or just wearing a diaper. The eyes are covered to protect them from the bright light. The baby is turned frequently.  The health care team carefully notes the infant's temperature, vital signs, and responses to the light. They also note how long the treatment lasted and the position of the light bulbs.  The baby may become dehydrated from the lights. Fluids may be given through a vein during treatment. Blood tests are done to check the bilirubin level. When the levels have dropped enough, phototherapy is complete. Some infants receive phototherapy at home. In this case, a nurse visits daily and draws a sample of blood for testing. Treatment depends on 3 things: Gestational age Bilirubin level in the blood Newborn's age (in hours)  In severe cases of increased bilirubin, an  exchange transfusion  may be done instead.  Alternative Names 
 
 Phototherapy for jaundice; Bilirubin - bili lights; Neonatal care - bili lights; Newborn care - bili lights Images 
 
 
 Bili lights 
 References 
 
 Maheshwari A, Carlo WA. Digestive system disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 102. Watchko JF. Neonatal indirect hyperbilirubinemia and kernicterus. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's diseases of the newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 79.  Read More 
 
 Newborn jaundice 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Newborn jaundice - discharge 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia