
 Biopsy - biliary tract 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A biliary tract biopsy is the removal of small amounts of cells and fluids from the duodenum, bile ducts, pancreas, or pancreatic duct. The sample is examined under a microscope. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample for a biliary tract biopsy can be obtained in different ways. A needle biopsy can be done if you have a well-defined tumor. The biopsy site is cleaned. A thin needle is inserted into the area to be tested, and a sample of cells and fluid are removed. The needle is then removed. Pressure is put on the area to stop any bleeding. The site will be covered with a bandage.  If you have a narrowing or blockage of the bile or pancreatic ducts, a sample can be taken during procedures such as: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram (PTCA)  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may not be able to eat or drink 8 to 12 hours or more before the test. Your health care provider will tell you ahead of time what you need to do. Make sure you have someone to drive you home. How the Test will Feel 
 
 How the test will feel depends on the type of procedure used to remove the biopsy sample. With a needle biopsy, you may feel a sting as the needle is inserted. Some people feel a cramping or pinching feeling during the procedure. Medicines that stop pain and help you relax are commonly used for other biliary tract biopsy methods. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A biliary tract biopsy can determine if a tumor started in the liver or spread from another location. It also can determine if the tumor is cancerous. This test may be done: After a physical exam,  x-ray ,  MRI ,  CT scan , or  ultrasound  shows abnormal growths in your biliary tract To test for diseases or infection  Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means there are no signs of cancer, disease, or infection in the biopsy sample. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Cancer of the bile ducts ( cholangiocarcinoma ) Cysts in the liver Liver cancer Pancreatic cancer Swelling and scarring of the bile ducts ( primary sclerosing cholangitis ) Risks 
 
 Risks depend on how the biopsy sample was taken. Risks may include: Bleeding at the biopsy site Infection Alternative Names 
 
 Cytology analysis - biliary tract; Biliary tract biopsy Images 
 
 
 Gallbladder endoscopy 
 References 
 
 Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gall bladder and bile ducts. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 158. Stockland AH, Baron TH. Endoscopic and radiologic treatment of biliary disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 Cyst 
 Duodenum 
 Hepatic 
 Malignancy 
 MRI 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Ultrasound 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Cancer 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Biopsy 
 Liver Cancer 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia