
 Biopsy - polyps 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A polyp  biopsy  is a test that takes a sample of, or removes polyps (abnormal growths) for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Polyps are growths of tissue that may be attached by a stalk-like structure (a  pedicle ). Polyps are commonly found in organs with many blood vessels. Such organs include the uterus,  colon , and  nose . Some polyps are cancerous (malignant) and the cancer cells are likely to spread. Most polyps are noncancerous (benign). The most common site of polyps that are treated is the colon. How a polyp biopsy is done depends on the location: Colonoscopy  or flexible sigmoidoscopy explores the large bowel Colposcopy-directed biopsy  examines the vagina and cervix Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) or other  endoscopy  is used for the throat, stomach, and small bowel Laryngoscopy  is used for the nose and throat For areas of the body that can be seen or where the polyp can be felt, a numbing medicine is applied to the skin. Then a small piece of the tissue that appears to be abnormal is removed. This tissue is sent to a laboratory. There, it is tested to see if it is cancerous. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 If the biopsy is in the nose or another surface that is open or can be seen, no special preparation is needed. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to not eat or drink anything (fast) before the biopsy. More preparation is needed for biopsies inside the body. For example, if you have a biopsy of the stomach, you should not eat anything for several hours before the procedure. If you are having a colonoscopy, a solution to clean your bowels is needed before the procedure. Follow your provider's preparation instructions exactly.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 For polyps on the skin surface, you may feel tugging while the biopsy sample is being taken. After the numbing medicine wears off, the area may be sore for a few days. Biopsies of polyps inside the body are done during procedures such as EGD or colonoscopy. Usually, you will not feel anything during or after the biopsy. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to determine if the growth is cancerous (malignant). The procedure may also be done to relieve symptoms, such as with the removal of nasal polyps. Normal Results 
 
 Examination of the biopsy sample shows the polyp to be benign (not cancerous). What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Cancer cells are present and may be a sign of a cancerous  tumor . Further tests may be needed. Often, the polyp may be removed. Risks 
 
 Risks include: Bleeding Hole (perforation) in organ Infection Alternative Names 
 
 Polyp biopsy References 
 
 Lentz G. Endoscopy: hysteroscopy and laparoscopy. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 10. Samlan RA, Kundak M. Visualization of the larynx. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 55. Soetikno R, Kaltenbach T, Friedland S, Matsuda T. Colonoscopic polypectomy, mucosal resection, and submucosal resection. In: Ginsberg GG, Gostout CJ, Kochman ML, Norton ID.  Clinical Gastrointestinal Endoscopy . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Biopsy 
 Colonic Polyps 
 Browse the Encyclopedia