
 Birth control pills - overview 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Birth control pills (BCPs) contain man-made forms of 2 hormones called estrogen and progestin. These hormones are made naturally in a woman's ovaries. Birth control pills can contain both of these hormones, or have progestin only. Both hormones prevent a woman's ovary from releasing an egg during her menstrual cycle (called ovulation). They do this by changing the levels of the natural hormones the body makes. Progestins also make the mucus around a woman's cervix thick and sticky. This helps prevent sperm from entering the uterus. Information 
 
 Birth control pills are also called oral contraceptives or just "the pill." A health care provider must prescribe birth control pills. The most common type of birth control  pill combines the hormones estrogen and progestin . There are many different forms of this type of pill. The "mini-pill" is a type of birth control pill that contains only progestin, no estrogen. These pills are an option for women who do not like the side effects of estrogen or who cannot take estrogen for medical reasons. They can also be used after delivery in women who are breastfeeding.  All women who take birth control pills need a check-up at least once a year. Women should also have their blood pressure checked 3 months after they begin to take the pill. Birth control pills only work well if the woman remembers to take her pill daily without missing a day. Only 2 or 3 women out of 100 who take birth control pills correctly for a year will get pregnant. Birth control pills may cause many side effects. These include: Changes in menstrual cycles, no menstrual cycles, extra bleeding Nausea, mood changes, worsening of migraines (mostly due to estrogens) Breast tenderness and weight gain Rare but dangerous risks from taking birth control pills include:  Blood clots Heart attack High blood pressure Stroke Birth control pills without estrogen  are much less likely to cause these problems. The risk is higher for women who smoke or have a history of high blood pressure, clotting disorders, or unhealthy cholesterol levels. However, the risks of developing these complications are much lower with either type of pill than with pregnancy.  Regular menstrual cycles will return within 3 to 6 months after a woman stops using most hormonal birth control methods.  Alternative Names 
 
 Contraception - pills - hormonal methods; Hormonal birth control methods; Birth control pills; Contraceptive pills; BCP; OCP; Family planning - BCP; Estrogen - BCP; Progestin - BCP References 
 
 Glasier A. Contraception. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al. eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 134. Harper DM, Wilfling LE, Blanner CF. Contraception. In: Rakel RE, Rakel D, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 26. Jensen JT, Mishell DR. Family planning: contraception, sterilization, and pregnancy termination. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 13. Winikoff B, Grossman D. Contraception. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 238. 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Control 
 Browse the Encyclopedia