
 Bladder biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bladder  biopsy  is a procedure in which small pieces of tissue are removed from the bladder. The tissue is tested under a microscope. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A bladder biopsy can be done as part of a  cystoscopy . Cystoscopy is a telescopic examination of the inside of the bladder. A small piece of tissue or the entire abnormal area is removed. The tissue is sent to the lab to be tested if: Abnormalities of the bladder are found during this exam A  tumor  is seen  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must sign an informed consent form before you have a bladder biopsy. In most cases, you are asked to urinate just before the procedure. You may also be asked to take an antibiotic before the procedure. For infants and children, the preparation you can provide for this test depends on your child's age, previous experiences, and level of trust. For general information regarding how you can prepare your child, see the following topics: Infant test or procedure preparation  (birth to 1 year) Toddler test or procedure preparation  (1 to 3 years) Preschooler test or procedure preparation  (3 to 6 years) School age test or procedure preparation  (6 to 12 years) Adolescent test or procedure preparation  (12 to 18 years)  How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have a slight discomfort as the cystoscope is passed through your urethra into your bladder. You will feel discomfort that is similar to a strong urge to urinate when the fluid has filled your bladder. You may feel a pinch during the biopsy. There may be a burning sensation when the blood vessels are sealed to stop bleeding (cauterized). After the cystoscope is removed, your urethra may be sore. You may feel a burning sensation during urination for a day or two. In some cases, the biopsy needs to be taken from a large area. In that case, you may need general or spinal anesthesia before the procedure. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is most often done to check for  cancer of the bladder  or urethra. Normal Results 
 
 The bladder wall is smooth. The bladder is of a normal size, shape, and position. There are no  blockages , growths, or  stones . What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The presence of cancer cells indicates bladder cancer. The type of cancer can be determined from the biopsy sample. Other abnormalities may include: Bladder  diverticula Cysts Infection Ulcers Risks 
 
 There is some risk for  urinary tract infection . There is a slight risk for excessive bleeding. There may be a rupture of the bladder wall with the cystoscope or during biopsy. There is also a risk that the biopsy will fail to diagnose a serious condition.  Considerations 
 
 You will likely have a small amount of blood in your urine shortly after this procedure. If the bleeding continues after you urinate, contact your health care provider. Also contact your provider if: You have pain, chills, or a fever. You are producing less urine than usual ( oliguria ). You cannot urinate despite a strong urge to do so.  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - bladder Images 
 
 
 Bladder catheterization, female 
 Bladder catheterization, male 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Bladder biopsy 
 References 
 
 Bladder tumors. First Consult. 2012.  www.clinicalkey.com/#!/content/medical_topic/21-s2.0-1014644 . Accessed June 9, 2016. Duty BD, Conlin MJ. Principles of urologic endoscopy. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 7. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy.  www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/diagnostic-tests/cystoscopy-ureteroscopy/Pages/default.aspx . Accessed June 9, 2016. Smith TG, Coburn M. Urologic surgery. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Cyst 
 Diverticulitis 
 Ulcers 
 
 Review Date 5/23/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia