
 Bladder cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bladder cancer is a cancer that starts in the bladder. The bladder is the body part that holds and releases urine. It is in the center of the lower abdomen. Causes 
 
 In the United States, bladder cancer often starts from the cells lining the bladder. These cells are called transitional cells. These tumors are classified by the way they grow: Papillary tumors look like warts and are attached to a stalk. Nonpapillary (sessile) tumors are flat. They are much less common. But they are more  invasive  and have a worse outcome. The exact cause of bladder cancer is not known. But several things may make you more likely to develop it: Cigarette smoking: Smoking greatly increases the risk of developing bladder cancer. Up to half of all bladder cancers in men and several in women may be caused by cigarette smoke. Chemical exposure at work: About 1 in 4 cases of bladder cancer is caused by coming into contact with cancer-causing chemicals at work. These chemicals are called carcinogens. Dye workers, rubber workers, aluminum workers, leather workers, truck drivers, and pesticide applicators are at the highest risk. Chemotherapy: The chemotherapy drug cyclophosphamide may increase the risk for bladder cancer. Your doctor may prescribe a medicine to reduce this risk. Radiation treatment: Women who had radiation therapy to treat cervical cancer have an increased risk of developing bladder cancer. Bladder infection : A long-term (chronic) bladder infection or irritation may lead to a certain type of bladder cancer. Research has not shown clear evidence that using artificial sweeteners leads to bladder cancer.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of bladder cancer can include: Abdominal pain Blood in the urine Bone pain or tenderness  if the cancer spreads to the bone Fatigue Painful urination Urinary frequency and urgency Urine leakage (incontinence) Weight loss Other diseases and conditions can cause similar symptoms. It is important to see a doctor to rule out all other possible causes. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a  physical examination , including a rectal and pelvic exam. Tests that may be done include: Abdominal CT scan 
   Abdominal MRI scan Cystoscopy  (examining the inside of the bladder with a camera), with biopsy Intravenous pyelogram - IVP 
   Pelvic CT scan
    Urinalysis Urine cytology If tests confirm you have bladder cancer, additional tests will be done to see if the cancer has spread. This is called staging. Staging helps guide future treatment and follow-up and gives you some idea of what to expect in the future. The TNM (tumor, nodes, metastatis) staging system is used to stage bladder cancer: Ta: The cancer is in the lining of the bladder only and has not spread. T1: The cancer goes through the bladder lining, but does not reach the bladder muscle. T2: The cancer spreads to the bladder muscle. T3: The cancer spreads past the bladder into the fatty tissue surrounding it. T4: The cancer has spread to nearby structures such as the prostate gland, uterus, vagina, rectum, abdominal wall, or pelvic wall. Tumors are also grouped based on how they appear under a microscope. This is called grading the tumor. A high-grade tumor is fast growing and more likely to spread. Bladder cancer can spread into nearby areas, including the: 
   Lymph nodes in the pelvis
    
   Bones
    
   Liver
    
   Lungs
    Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the stage of the cancer, the severity of your symptoms, and your overall health. Stage 0 and I treatments: 
   Surgery to remove the tumor without removing the rest of the bladder
    Chemotherapy  or immunotherapy placed directly into the bladder
    Stage II and III treatments: 
   Surgery to remove the entire bladder (radical cystectomy) and nearby lymph nodes
    
   Surgery to remove only part of the bladder, followed by radiation and chemotherapy
    
   Chemotherapy to shrink the tumor before surgery
    
   A combination of chemotherapy and radiation (in people who choose not to have surgery or who cannot have surgery)
    Most people with stage IV tumors cannot be cured and surgery is not appropriate. In these people, chemotherapy is often considered. CHEMOTHERAPY Chemotherapy may be given to people with stage II and III disease either before or after surgery to help prevent the tumor from returning. For early disease (stages 0 and I), chemotherapy is usually given directly into the bladder. A  Foley catheter  can be used to deliver the medicine into the bladder. Common side effects include bladder wall irritation and pain when urinating. For more advanced stages (II-IV), chemotherapy is usually given by vein (intravenously). IMMUNOTHERAPY Bladder cancers are often treated with immunotherapy. In this treatment, a medicine triggers your immune system to attack and kill the cancer cells. Immunotherapy for bladder cancer is often performed using the Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine (commonly known as BCG). As with all treatments, side effects are possible. Ask your doctor what side effects you might expect, and what to do if they occur. SURGERY Surgery for bladder cancer includes: Transurethral resection of the bladder (TURB): Cancerous bladder tissue is removed through the urethra. Partial or complete removal of the bladder: Many people with stage II or III bladder cancer may need to have their bladder removed (radical cystectomy). Sometimes, only part of the bladder is removed. Chemotherapy is usually given before or after this surgery.  Surgery may also be done to help your body drain urine after the bladder is removed. This may include: Ileal conduit: A small urine reservoir is surgically created from a short piece of your small intestine. The ureters that drain urine from the kidneys are attached to 1 end of this piece. The other end is brought out through an opening in the skin (a stoma). The stoma allows the person to drain the collected urine out of the reservoir. Continent urinary reservoir: A pouch to collect urine is created inside your body using a piece of your intestine. You will need to insert a tube into an opening in your skin (stoma) into this pouch to drain the urine. Orthotopic neobladder: This surgery is becoming more common in people who have had their bladder removed. A part of your bowel is folded over to make a pouch that collects urine. It is attached to the place in the body where the urine normally empties from the bladder. This procedure allows you to maintain some normal urinary control.  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After treatment for bladder cancer, you will be closely monitored by a doctor. This may include: CT scans to check for the spread or return of cancer Monitoring symptoms that might suggest the disease is getting worse, such as fatigue, weight loss, increased pain, decreased bowel and bladder function, and weakness 
   Complete blood count (CBC) to monitor for anemia
    
   Bladder exams every 3 to 6 months after treatment
    
   Urinalysis if you did not have your bladder removed
    How well a person with bladder cancer does depends on the initial stage and response to treatment of the bladder cancer. The outlook for stage 0 or I cancers is fairly good. Although the risk for the cancer returning is high, most bladder cancers that return can be surgically removed and cured. The cure rates for people with stage III tumors are less than 50%. People with stage IV bladder cancer are rarely cured. Possible Complications 
 
 Bladder cancers may spread into the nearby organs. They may also travel through the pelvic lymph nodes and spread to the liver, lungs, and bones. Additional complications of bladder cancer include: Anemia Swelling of the ureters ( hydronephrosis ) Urethral stricture Urinary incontinence  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have blood in your urine or other symptoms of bladder cancer, including: Frequent urination Painful urination Urgent need to urinate  Prevention 
 
 If you smoke, quit. Smoking can increase your risk for bladder cancer. Avoid exposure to chemicals linked to bladder cancer. Alternative Names 
 
 Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder; Urothelial cancer Images 
 
 
 Cystoscopy 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute: PDQ bladder cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 18, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/bladder/healthprofessional . Accessed April 4, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): Bladder cancer. Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/bladder.pdf . Accessed April 4, 2016. Smith A, Balar AV, Milowsky MI, Chen RC. Bladder cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 83. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Hydronephrosis of one kidney 
 Invasive 
 Stress urinary incontinence 
 Tumor 
 Urethral stricture 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia