
 Blastomycosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blastomycosis is an infection caused by breathing in the  Blastomyces dermatitidis  fungus. The fungus is found in decaying wood and soil. Causes 
 
 You can get blastomycosis by contact with moist soil, most commonly where there is rotting wood and leaves. The fungus enters the body through the lungs, where the infection starts. The fungus can then spread to other parts of the body. The disease may affect the skin, bones and joints, and other areas. Blastomycosis is rare. It is found in the central and southeastern United States, and in Canada, India, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Africa. The key risk factor for the disease is contact with infected soil. It most often affects people with weakened immune systems, such as those with  HIV/AIDS  or who have had an organ transplant. It can also infect healthy people. Men are more likely to be affected than women. Symptoms 
 
 Lung infection may not cause any symptoms. Symptoms may be seen if the infection spreads. Symptoms may include: Joint pain Chest pain Cough  (may produce brown or bloody mucus) Fatigue Fever  and night sweats General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Muscle pain Unintentional weight loss Most people develop skin symptoms when the infection spreads. You may get papules, pustules, or nodules on exposed body areas. The pustules: May look like warts or ulcers Are usually painless Vary in color from gray to violet May appear in the nose and mouth Bleed easily and form ulcers  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical examination. You'll be asked about your medical history and symptoms. If the provider suspects you have a fungal infection, diagnosis can be confirmed by these tests: Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Skin  biopsy Sputum culture  and examination Tissue biopsy Urine culture Treatment 
 
 You may not need to take medicine for a mild blastomycosis infection that stays in the lungs. The provider may recommend the following antifungal medicines when the disease is severe or spreads outside of the lungs. Fluconazole Itraconazole Ketoconazole Amphotericin B may be used for severe infections. Follow up regularly with your provider to make sure the infection does not return. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with minor skin sores (lesions) and mild lung infections usually recover completely. The infection can lead to death if not treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of blastomycosis may include: Large sores with pus ( abscesses ) Skin sores can lead to scarring and loss of skin color (pigment) Return of the infection (relapse or disease recurrence) Side effects from drugs such as amphotericin B When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of blastomycosis. Prevention 
 
 Avoiding travel to areas where the infection is known to occur may help prevent exposure to the fungus, but this may not always be possible.  Alternative Names 
 
 North American blastomycosis; Gilchrist disease Images 
 
 
 Fungus 
 References 
 
 Bradsher RW. Blastomycosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 266. Kauffman CA. Blastomycosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 334. Robles WS, Ameen M. Blastomycosis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Skin lesion of blastomycosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Leg amputation - discharge 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia