
 Bleeding disorders 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bleeding disorders are a group of conditions in which there is a problem with the body's blood clotting process. These disorders can lead to heavy and prolonged bleeding after an injury. Bleeding can also begin on its own. Specific bleeding disorders include: Acquired platelet function defects Congenital platelet function defects Congenital protein C or S deficiency Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) Factor II deficiency Factor V deficiency Factor VII deficiency Factor X deficiency Factor XII deficiency Glanzmann disease Hemophilia A Hemophilia B Hemophilia C (Factor XI deficiency) Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) Von Willebrand's disease  (types I, II, and III)  Causes 
 
 Watch this video about: Blood clotting Normal blood clotting involves blood components called platelets and as many as 20 different plasma proteins. These are known as blood clotting or coagulation factors. These factors interact with other chemicals to form a substance called fibrin that stops bleeding. Problems can occur when certain factors are low or missing. Bleeding problems can range from mild to severe. Some bleeding disorders are present at birth and are passed through families (inherited). Others develop from: Illnesses such as vitamin K deficiency or severe liver disease Treatments such as the use of drugs to stop blood clots (anticoagulants) or the long-term use of antibiotics  Bleeding disorders can also result from a problem with the number or function of the blood cells that promote blood clotting (platelets). These disorders can also be either inherited or develop later (acquired). The side effects of certain drugs often lead to the acquired forms. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following:  Bleeding into joints or muscles Bruising easily Heavy bleeding Heavy menstrual bleeding Nosebleeds that do not stop easily Excessive bleeding with surgical procedures Umbilical cord bleeding after birth  The type of problems that occur depend on the specific bleeding disorder, and how severe it is. Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Bleeding time Partial thromboplastin time ( PTT ) Platelet aggregation test Prothrombin time ( PT )  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the type of disorder. It may include: Clotting factor replacement Fresh frozen plasma transfusion Platelet transfusion Other treatments Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome also depends on the disorder. Most primary bleeding disorders can be managed. When the disorders is due to diseases, such as DIC, the outcome will depend on how well the underlying disease can be treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding in the brain  Severe bleeding (usually from the gastrointestinal tract or injuries)  Other complications can occur, depending on the disorder. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice any unusual or severe bleeding. Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the specific disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Coagulopathy References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 139. Jobe S, Di Paola J. Congenital and acquired disorders of platelet function. In: Kitchens CS, Kessler CM, Konkle BA, eds.  Consultative Hemostasis and Thrombosis . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders: chap 10. Ragni MV. Hemorrhagic disorders: Coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2012:chap 177. Read More 
 
 Liver disease 
 Vitamin K 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, leukemia/bone marrow transplant program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia