
 Blepharitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blepharitis is inflamed, irritated, itchy, and reddened eyelids. It most often occurs where the eyelashes grow. Dandruff-like debris builds up at the base of the eyelashes as well. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of blepharitis is unknown. It is thought to be due to: An overgrowth of bacteria. A decrease or breakdown of the normal oils produced by the eyelid. Blepharitis is more likely to be seen in people with: A skin condition called  seborrheic . This problem involves the scalp, eyebrows, eyelids, skin behind the ears, and the creases of the nose Allergies  that affect the eyelashes (less common) Excess growth of the bacteria that are normally found on the skin Rosacea , which is a skin condition that causes a red rash on the face  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include:  Red, irritated eyelids Scales  that stick to the base of the eyelashes Burning feeling in the eyelids Crusting,  itching  and swelling of the eyelids You may feel like you have sand or dust in your eye when you blink. Sometimes, the eyelashes may fall out. The eyelids may become scarred if the condition continues long-term. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can most often make the diagnosis by looking at the eyelids during an eye exam. Special photos of the glands that produce oil for the eyelids can be taken to see if they are healthy or not. Treatment 
 
 Cleaning the edges of the eyelid every day will help remove excess bacteria and oil. Your provider might recommend using baby shampoo or special cleansers. Using an antibiotic ointment in the eyelid or taking antibiotic pills may help treat the problem. It may also help to take fish oil supplements. If you have blepharitis: Apply warm compresses to your eyes for 5 minutes, at least 2 times per day. After the warm compresses, gently rub a solution of warm water and no-tears baby shampoo along your eyelid, where the lash meets the lid, using a cotton swab. A device has recently been developed that can “massage” the eyelids to increase the flow of oil from the glands. The role of this device remains unclear. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is most often good with treatment. You may need to keep the eyelid clean to prevent the problem from coming back. Continuing treatment will ease redness and help make your eyes more comfortable. Styes  and  chalazia  are more common in people with blepharitis.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call with your provider if symptoms get worse or DO NOT improve after several days of carefully cleaning your eyelids.  Prevention 
 
 Cleaning the eyelids carefully will help reduce the chances of getting blepharitis. Treat skin conditions that may add to the problem.  Alternative Names 
 
 Eyelid inflammation; Meibomian gland dysfunction Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Blepharitis 
 References 
 
 Blackie CA, Coleman CA, Holland EJ. The sustained effect (12 months) of a single-dose vectored thermal pulsation procedure for meibomian gland dysfunction and evaporative dry eye.  Clin Ophthalmol . 2016;10:1385-1396. PMID: 27555745  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27555745 . Epitropoulos AT. Lid hygiene product helps reduce blepharitis, MGD symptoms.  Ophthalmology Times.  November 15, 2015.  ophthalmologytimes.modernmedicine.com/ophthalmologytimes/news/lid-hygiene-product-helps-reduce-blepharitis-mgd-symptoms . Accessed September 8, 2016. Gadaria-Rathod N, Fernandez KB, Asbell PA. Blepharitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.4. Hussein N, Schwab IR. Blepharitis and Inflammation of the eyelids. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4, chap 22. Yanoff M, Cameron JD. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Body lice 
 Chalazion 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 Corneal ulcers and infections 
 Eyelid bump 
 Rosacea 
 Scales 
 Seborrheic dermatitis 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Infections 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia