
 Blind loop syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blind loop syndrome occurs when digested food slows or stops moving through part of the intestines. This causes an overgrowth of bacteria in the intestines. It also leads to problems absorbing nutrients. Causes 
 
 The name of this condition refers to the "blind loop" formed by part of the intestine that is bypassed. This blockage does not allow digested food to flow normally through the intestinal tract. The substances needed to digest fats (called bile salts) do not work as they should when a section of the intestine is affected by blind loop syndrome. This prevents fat and fat-soluble vitamins from being absorbed into the body. It also leads to fatty stools.  Vitamin B12  deficiency may occur because the extra bacteria that form in the blind loop use up this vitamin.  Blind loop syndrome is a complication that occurs: After many operations, including subtotal  gastrectomy  (surgical removal of part of the stomach) and operations for extreme obesity As a complication of  inflammatory bowel disease Diseases such as  diabetes  or  scleroderma  may slow down movement in a segment of the intestine, leading to blind loop syndrome. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Diarrhea Fatty stools Fullness after a meal Loss of appetite Nausea Unintentional weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider may notice a mass in, or swelling of, the abdomen. Possible tests include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal x-ray Blood tests to check nutritional status Upper GI series  with small bowel follow through contrast x-ray  Treatment 
 
 Treatment most often starts with antibiotics for the excess bacteria growth, along with vitamin B12 supplements. If antibiotics are not effective, surgery may be needed to help food flow through the intestines.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many people get better with antibiotics. If surgical repair is needed, the outcome is often very good. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Complete  intestinal obstruction Death of intestine ( intestinal infarction ) Hole (perforation) in intestine Malabsorption  and  malnutrition When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of blind loop syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Stasis syndrome; Stagnant loop syndrome Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Stomach and small intestine 
 References 
 
 Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Bile 
 Crohn disease 
 Gastrectomy 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Scleroderma 
 Vitamin B12 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Crohn's Disease 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Scleroderma 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Weight Loss Surgery 
 Browse the Encyclopedia