
 Blockage of upper airway 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blockage of the upper airway occurs when the upper breathing passages become narrowed or blocked, making it hard to breathe. Areas in the upper airway that can be affected are the windpipe (trachea), voice box (larynx) or throat (pharynx). Causes 
 
 The airway can become narrowed or blocked due to many causes, including: Allergic reactions  in which the trachea or throat swell closed, including allergic reactions to a  bee sting , peanuts, antibiotics (such as penicillin), and blood pressure medicines (such as ACE inhibitors) Chemical burns  and reactions Epiglottitis  (infection of the structure separating the trachea from the esophagus) Fire or burns from breathing in smoke Foreign bodies, such as peanuts and other breathed-in foods, pieces of a balloon, buttons, coins, and small toys Infections of the upper airway area Injury to the upper airway area Peritonsillar abscess  (collection of infected material near the tonsils)
  Retropharyngeal abscess  (collection of infected material in the back of the airway)
  Throat cancer Tracheomalacia  (weakness of the cartilage that supports the trachea) Vocal cord problems Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary, depending on the cause. But some symptoms are common to all types of airway blockage. These include: Agitation  or fidgeting Bluish color to the skin ( cyanosis ) Changes in consciousness Choking Confusion Difficulty breathing Gasping for air Panic Unconsciousness Wheezing , crowing, whistling, or other unusual breathing noises indicating breathing difficulty Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical examination, which may show: Decreased breath sounds in the lungs Rapid, shallow, or slowed breathing Tests are usually not necessary, but may include: Bronchoscopy Laryngoscopy X-rays Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the blockage. Objects stuck in the airway may be removed with special instruments. A tube may be inserted into the airway ( endotracheal tube ) to help with breathing.
   Sometimes an opening is made through the neck into the airway ( tracheostomy  or cricothyrotomy). If the obstruction is due to a foreign body, such as a piece of food that has been breathed in, doing  abdominal thrusts  can save the person's life. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt treatment is often successful. But the condition is dangerous and may be fatal, even when treated. Possible Complications 
 
 If the obstruction is not relieved, it can cause: Brain damage Breathing failure Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Airway obstruction is often an emergency. Call 911 or the local emergency number for medical help. Follow instructions on how to help keep the person breathing until help arrives. Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the cause of the upper airway obstruction. The following methods may help prevent an obstruction: Eat slowly and chew food completely. Do not drink too much alcohol before or while eating. Keep small objects away from young children. Make sure dentures fit properly. Learn how to clear a foreign body from the airway using a method such as abdominal thrusts. Alternative Names 
 
 Airway obstruction - acute upper Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Choking 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Cukor J, Manno M. Pediatric respiratory emergencies: upper airway obstruction and infections. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 168. Reardon RF, Mason PE, Clinton JE. Basic airway management and decision-making. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts & Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 3. Thomas SH, Goodloe JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practic e. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute 
 Allergic reactions 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Chemical burn or reaction 
 Croup 
 Epiglottitis 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Peritonsillar abscess 
 Respiratory 
 Retropharyngeal abscess 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Unconsciousness - first aid 
 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Choking 
 Throat Disorders 
 Tracheal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia