
 Blood pressure monitors for home 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Your health care provider may ask you to keep  track of your blood pressure  at home. To do this, you will need to get a home blood pressure monitor. The monitor you choose should be of good quality and fit well. MANUAL BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORS Manual devices include a cuff that wraps around your arm, a rubber squeeze bulb, and a gauge that measures the blood pressure. A stethoscope is needed to listen to the blood pulsing through the artery. You can see your blood pressure on the circular dial of the gauge as the needle moves around and the pressure in the cuff rises or falls. When used correctly, manual devices are very accurate. However, they are not the recommended type of blood pressure monitor for home use.  DIGITAL BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORS A digital device will also have a cuff that wraps around your arm. To inflate the cuff, you may need to use a rubber squeeze ball. Other kinds will inflate automatically when you push a button. After the cuff is inflated, the pressure will slowly drop on its own. The screen will show a digital readout of your systolic and diastolic blood pressure. After showing your blood pressure, the cuff will deflate on its own. With most machines, you must wait for 2 to 3 minutes before using it again. A digital blood pressure monitor will not be as accurate if your body is moving when you are using it. Also, an irregular heart rate will make the reading less accurate. However, digital monitors are the best choice for most people.  TIPS FOR MONITORING YOUR BLOOD PRESSURE Practice using the monitor with your health care provider to make sure you are taking your blood pressure correctly. Your arm should be supported, with your upper arm at heart level and feet on the floor (back supported, legs uncrossed). It is best to measure your blood pressure after you rest for at least 5 minutes. DO NOT take your blood pressure when you are under stress, have had caffeine, or used a tobacco product in the last 30 minutes, or have recently exercised.  Alternative Names 
 
 Hypertension - home monitoring References 
 
 Victor RG. Arterial hypertension In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 67. Victor RG. Systemic hypertension: mechanisms and diagnosis. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, et al. eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43. 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 High Blood Pressure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia