
 Blood sugar test - blood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A blood glucose test measures the amount of a sugar called glucose in a sample of your blood. Glucose is a major source of energy for most cells of the body, including brain cells. Carbohydrates are found in fruit, cereal, bread, pasta, and rice. They are quickly turned into glucose in your body. This raises your blood glucose level.  Hormones made in the body help control blood glucose level. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 The test may be done in the following ways:  After you have not eaten anything for at least 8 hours (fasting) At any time of the day (random) Two hours after you drink a certain amount of glucose ( oral glucose tolerance test )  How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this test if you have signs of  diabetes . More than likely, the doctor will order a fasting blood sugar test. The blood glucose test is also used to monitor people who already have diabetes.  The test may also be done if you have: An increase in how often you need to urinate Blurred vision Confusion or a change in the way you normally talk or behave Fainting spells Seizures (for the first time)  SCREENING FOR DIABETES This test may also be used to screen a person for diabetes. High blood sugar and diabetes may not cause symptoms in the early stages. A fasting blood sugar test is almost always done to screen for diabetes. If you are over age 45, you should be tested every 3 years. If you have any of the risk factors below, ask your health care provider about getting tested at an earlier age and more often: Overweight (body mass index, or BMI, of 25 or higher) and other risk factors Blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg or higher, or unhealthy cholesterol levels Member of a high-risk ethnic group (African American, Hispanic American, Native American, Asian American, or Pacific Islander) Woman who has delivered a baby weighing 9 pounds (lb), or 4 kilograms (kg) or more, or who had  gestational diabetes Polycystic ovary disease Close relative with diabetes (such as a parent, brother or sister)  Children age 10 and older who are overweight and have at least 2 of the risk factors listed above should be tested for type 2 diabetes every 3 years, even if they have no symptoms. Normal Results 
 
 If you had a fasting blood glucose test, a level between 70 and 100 mg/dL (3.9 and 5.6 mmol/L) is considered normal. If you had a random blood glucose test, a normal result depends on when you last ate. Most of the time, the blood glucose level will be below 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L). The examples above show the common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If you had a fasting blood glucose test:  A level of 100 to 125 mg/dL (5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L) means you have impaired fasting glucose, a type of prediabetes. This increases your risk of developing type 2 diabetes. A level of 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L) and higher usually means you have diabetes.  If you had a random blood glucose test: A level of 200 mg/dL (11 mmol/L) or higher often means you have diabetes. Your provider will order a fasting blood glucose,  HbA1c test , or  glucose tolerance test , depending on your random blood glucose test result. In someone who has diabetes, an abnormal result on the random blood glucose test may mean that the diabetes is not well controlled.  Other medical problems can also cause a higher-than-normal blood glucose level, including: Overactive thyroid gland Pancreatic cancer Swelling and inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) Stress due to trauma, stroke, heart attack, or surgery Rare tumors, including  pheochromocytoma ,  acromegaly ,  Cushing syndrome , or  glucagonoma A lower-than-normal blood glucose level ( hypoglycemia ) may be due to: Hypopituitarism  (a pituitary gland disorder) Underactive thyroid gland  or adrenal gland Tumor in the pancreas ( insulinoma  - very rare) Too little food Too much insulin or other diabetes medicines Liver or kidney disease Weight loss after weight loss surgery Vigorous exercise  Some medicines can raise or lower your blood glucose level. Before having the test, tell your provider about all the medicines you are taking. For some thin young women, a fasting blood sugar level below 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) may be normal. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Random blood sugar; Blood sugar level; Fasting blood sugar; Glucose test; Diabetic screening - blood sugar test; Diabetes - blood sugar test Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes-2016: summary of revisions.  Diabetes Care . 2016;39 Suppl 1:S4-S5. PMID: 26696680  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26696680 .
 Pagana KD, Pagana TJ. Blood studies. In: Pagana KD, Pagana TJ, eds.  Mosby's Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests . 5th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 2. Selph S, Dana T, Blazina I, Bougatsos C, Patel H, Chou R. Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.  Ann Intern Med . 2015;162(11):765-776. PMID: 25867111  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25867111 . Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 Acute adrenal crisis 
 Carbohydrates 
 Confusion 
 Cushing disease 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Cushing syndrome due to adrenal tumor 
 Delirium 
 Dementia 
 Dementia due to metabolic causes 
 Diabetes 
 Diabetes and kidney disease 
 Diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Exogenous Cushing syndrome 
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizure 
 Glucagon blood test 
 Glucagonoma 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Insulinoma 
 Low blood sugar 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Pancreatic cancer 
 Pancreatic islet cell tumor 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Transient ischemic attack 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 Unconsciousness - first aid 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Type 2 diabetes - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 7/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Sugar 
 Diabetes 
 Diabetes in Children and Teens 
 Prediabetes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia