
 Blood culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A blood culture is a laboratory test to check for bacteria or other germs in a blood sample. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample is needed . The site where blood will be drawn is first cleaned with an antiseptic such as chlorhexidine. This reduces the chance of an organism from the skin getting into (contaminating) the blood sample and causing a false-positive result (see below).  The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria or other disease-causing germs grow. A  gram stain  may also be done. A gram stain is a method of identifying bacteria using a special series of stains (colors). With some infections, bacteria can be found in the blood only intermittently. So, a series of three or more blood cultures may be done to increase the chance of finding the infection.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 

Your health care provider may order this test if you have symptoms of a serious infection, also known as  sepsis . Symptoms of sepsis can include high fever, chills, rapid breathing and heart rate, confusion, and low blood pressure. The blood culture helps identify the type of bacteria causing the infection. This helps your provider determine how best to treat the infection. Normal Results 
 
 A normal value means that no bacteria or other germs were seen in your blood sample. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal (positive) result means that germs were identified in your blood. The medical term for this is bacteremia. This can be the result of sepsis. Sepsis is a medical emergency and you will be admitted to a hospital for treatment. Other types of germs, such as a fungus or a virus, may also be found in a blood culture. Sometimes, an abnormal result can be due to contamination. This means bacteria may be found, but it came from your skin or from the lab equipment, instead of your blood. This is called a false-positive result. It means you do not have a true infection. Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - blood  References 
 
 Eckert P, Bayram JD, Omron R. Blood culture collection for suspected bacteremia.  JAMA.  2013;309:339. PMID 23340623  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23340623 . Munford RS, Suffredini AF. Sepsis, severe sepis, and septic shock. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 75. Murray PR. The clinician and the microbiology laboratory. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Sepsis 
 Septicemia 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Sepsis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia