
 Blount disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Blount disease is a growth disorder of the shin bone (tibia) in which the lower leg turns inward, making it look like a bowleg. Causes 
 
 Blount disease occurs in young children and adolescents. The cause is unknown. It is thought to be due to the effects of weight on the growth plate. The inner part of the shin bone, just below the knee, fails to develop normally. Unlike  bowlegs , which tend to straighten as the child develops, Blount disease slowly gets worse. It can cause severe bowing of one or both legs. This condition is more common among African-American children. It is also associated with obesity and early walking. Symptoms 
 
 One or both of the lower legs turn inward. This is called "bowing." It may: Look the same on both legs Occur just below the knee Rapidly get worse  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. This will show that the lower legs turn inward. An  x-ray of the knee  and the lower leg confirms the diagnosis.  Treatment 
 
 Braces are used to treat children who develop severe bowing before the age of 3.  Surgery is most often needed if braces do not work, or if the problem is not diagnosed until the child is older. Surgery may involve cutting the shin bone to place it in the proper position. Sometimes the bone will be lengthened as well. Other times, surgery is done to restrict the growth of the outer half of the shin bone. This allows the child's natural growth to reverse the bowing process. This is a much smaller surgery. It works best in children with less severe symptoms who still have quite a bit of growing to do. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the leg can be placed into the proper position, the outlook is good. The leg should work properly and look normal. Possible Complications 
 
 Failure to treat Blount disease may lead to progressive deformity. The condition may lead to differences in leg lengths, which can result in disability if not treated. Blount disease may come back after surgery, especially in younger children. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your child's health care provider if your child's leg or legs appear to be bowing. Also call if your child has bowed legs that appear to be getting worse. Prevention 
 
 Weight loss for overweight children may be helpful. Alternative Names 
 
 Blount's disease; Tibia vara Images 
 
 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Canale ST. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 32.  Wells L, Sehgal K. Coronal Plane Deformities. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB,Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 667.4. Read More 
 
 Bowlegs 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Leg Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia