
 Body mass index 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A good way to decide if your weight is healthy for your height is to figure out your body mass index (BMI). You and your health care provider can use your BMI to estimate how much body fat you have. Being  obese  puts strain on your heart and can lead to  serious health problems . These include: Arthritis in your knees and hips Heart disease High blood pressure Sleep apnea Type 2 diabetes Varicose veins  HOW TO DETERMINE YOUR BMI Your BMI estimates how much you should weigh based on your height.  There are many websites with calculators that give your BMI when you enter your weight and height.  You can also calculate it yourself: Multiply your weight in pounds by 703. Divide that answer by your height in inches. Divide that answer by your height in inches again.  For example, a woman who weighs 270 pounds (122 kilograms) and is 68 inches (172 centimeters) tall has a BMI of 41.0. Use the chart below to see what category your BMI falls into, and whether you need to be concerned about your weight. Use the chart to see what category your BMI falls into BMI CATEGORY Below 18.5 Underweight 18.5 to 24.9 Healthy 25.0 to 29.9 Overweight 30.0 to 39.9 Obese Over 40 Extreme or high risk obesity BMI is not always the best way to decide whether you need to lose weight. If you have more or less muscle than is normal, your BMI may not be a perfect measure of how much body fat you have: Body builders.  Because muscle weighs more than fat, people who are very muscular may have a high BMI. Elderly.  In older adults it is often better to have a BMI between 25 and 27, rather than under 25. If you are older than 65, for example, a slightly higher BMI may help protect you from thinning of the bones (osteoporosis). Children.  While many children are obese, DO NOT use this BMI calculator for evaluating a child. Talk to your child's provider about the right weight for your child's age.  Providers use a few methods to decide whether you are overweight. Your provider may also take your waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio into consideration. Your BMI alone can't predict your health risk, but most experts say that a BMI greater than 30 (obesity) is unhealthy. No matter what your BMI is, exercise can help reduce your risk of heart disease and diabetes. Remember to always talk to your provider before starting an exercise program. Alternative Names 
 
 BMI; Obesity - body mass index; Obesity - BMI; Overweight - body mass index; Overweight - BMI Images 
 
 
 Calculating body frame size 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About adult BMI. CDC.gov. Updated May 15, 2015.  www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/index.html . Accessed July 29, 2016. Gahagan S. Overweight and obesity. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 47. Jensen MD. Obesity. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 220. Read More 
 
 Gastric bypass surgery 
 Laparoscopic gastric banding 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gastric bypass surgery - discharge  
 Laparoscopic gastric banding - discharge  
 Weight-loss surgery - after - what to ask your doctor  
 Weight-loss surgery - before - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Body Weight 
 Obesity 
 Weight Control 
 Browse the Encyclopedia