
 Bone tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bone  tumor  is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous ( benign ). Causes 
 
 The cause of bone tumors is unknown. They often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly. Possible causes include: Genetic defects passed down through families Radiation Injury  In most cases, no specific cause is found. Osteochondromas are the most common noncancerous (benign) bone tumors. They occur most often in young people between the ages of 10 and 20. Cancers that start in the bones are called primary bone tumors. Cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or colon) are called secondary or metastatic bone tumors. They behave very differently from primary bone tumors. Cancerous primary bone tumors include: Chondrosarcoma Ewing sarcoma Fibrosarcoma Osteosarcomas Cancers that most often spread to the bone are cancers of the: Breast Kidney Lung Prostate Thyroid  These forms of cancer usually affect older people. Bone cancer is more common in persons who have a family history of cancers. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of bone tumor may include any of the following: Bone fracture, especially from slight injury (trauma) Bone pain , may be worse at night Occasionally a mass and swelling can be felt at the tumor site  Some benign tumors have no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Alkaline phosphatase  blood level Bone biopsy Bone scan Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest MRI  of the bone and surrounding tissue X-ray of bone  and surrounding tissue  PET scan This following tests may also be ordered to monitor the disease: Alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme Blood calcium level Parathyroid hormone Blood phosphorus  level  Treatment 
 
 Some benign bone tumors go away on their own and do not need treatment. Your doctor will closely monitor you. You will likely need regular imaging tests, such as x-rays, to see if the tumor shrinks or grows.  Surgery may be needed to remove the tumor in some cases. Treatment for cancerous bone tumors that have spread from other parts of the body depends on where the cancer started. Radiation therapy may be given to prevent fractures or to relieve pain. Chemotherapy may be used to prevent fractures or the need for surgery or radiation. Tumors that start in the bone are rare. After biopsy, a combination of chemotherapy and surgery is usually necessary. Radiation therapy may be needed before or after surgery. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the type of bone tumor.  Outcome is usually people with noncancerous (benign) tumors. But some benign bone tumors can turn into cancer. People with cancerous bone tumors that have not spread may be cured. The cure rate depends on the type of cancer, location, size, and other factors. Talk to your doctor about your particular cancer.  Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result from the tumor or treatment include: Pain Reduced function, depending on the tumor Side effects of chemotherapy Spread of the cancer to other nearby tissues (metastasis)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of a bone tumor. Alternative Names 
 
 Tumor - bone; Bone cancer; Primary bone tumor; Secondary bone tumor; Bone tumor - benign Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Skeleton 
 Osteogenic sarcoma - x-ray 
 Ewings sarcoma - x-ray 
 References 
 
 Coleman RE, Holen I. Bone metastases. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 51. Heck RK Jr. Benign/aggressive tumors of bone. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 26. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): Bone cancer. Updated 2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/bone.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Cancer 
 Ewing sarcoma 
 Incidence 
 Metastasis 
 Proton therapy 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Cancer 
 Bone Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia