
 Bone scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bone scan is an imaging test used to diagnose bone diseases and find out how severe they are. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A bone scan involves injecting a very small amount of radioactive material (radiotracer) into a vein. The substance travels through your blood to the bones and organs. As it wears off, it gives off a little bit of radiation. This radiation is detected by a camera that slowly scans your body. The camera takes pictures of how much radiotracer collects in the bones. If a bone scan is done to see if you have a bone infection, images may be taken shortly after the radioactive material is injected and again 3 to 4 hours later, when it has collected in the bones. This process is called a 3-phase bone scan. To evaluate  metastatic  bone disease, images are taken only after the 3- to 4-hour delay. The scanning part of the test will last about 1 hour. The scanner's camera may move above and around you. You may need to change positions. You will probably be asked to drink extra water after you receive the radiotracer to keep the material from collecting in your bladder. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must remove jewelry and other metal objects. You may be asked to wear a hospital gown. Tell your doctor if you are or may be pregnant. DO NOT take any medicine with bismuth in it, such as Pepto-Bismol, for 4 days before the test. Follow any other instructions you are given. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is a small amount of pain when the needle is inserted. During the scan there is no pain. You must remain still during the scan. You will be instructed when to change positions by the technologist. You may experience some discomfort due to lying still for a long period. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A bone scan is used to: Diagnose a bone tumor or cancer Determine if a cancer that began elsewhere in your body has spread to the bones. Common cancers that spread to the bones include breast, lung, prostate, thyroid, and kidney. Diagnose a fracture, when it cannot be seen on a regular x-ray (most commonly hip fractures, stress fractures in the feet or legs, or spine fractures) Diagnose a  bone infection (osteomyelitis) Diagnose or determine the cause of bone pain, when no other cause has been identified Evaluate metabolic disorders, such as  osteomalacia ,  primary hyperparathyroidism ,  osteoporosis ,  complex regional pain syndrome , and  Paget disease Normal Results 
 
 Test results are considered normal if the radiotracer is present evenly throughout all the bones. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal scan will show "hot spots" and/or "cold spots" as compared to surrounding bone. Hot spots are areas where there is an increased collection of the radioactive material. Cold spots are areas that have taken up less of the radioactive material. Bone scan findings must be compared with other imaging studies, in addition to clinical information. Your provider will discuss any abnormal findings with you. Risks 
 
 If you are pregnant or nursing, the test may be postponed to prevent exposing the baby to radiation. If you must have the test while breastfeeding, you should pump and throw away the breast milk for the next 2 days. The amount of radiation injected into your vein is very small. All radiation is gone from the body within 2 to 3 days. The radiotracer that is used exposes you to a very small amount of radiation. The risk is probably no greater than with routine or conventional x-rays. Risks related to the bone radiotracer are rare, but may include: Anaphylaxis  (severe allergic response) Rash Swelling There is a slight risk of infection or bleeding when the needle is inserted into a vein. Alternative Names 
 
 Scintigraphy - bone Images 
 
 
 Nuclear scan 
 References 
 
 Bearcroft PWP, Hopper MA. Imaging techniques and fundamental observations for the musculoskeletal system. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 45.  Ribbens C, Namur G. Bone scintigraphy and positron emission tomography. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 43. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Metabolism 
 Osteomyelitis 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Cancer 
 Bone Diseases 
 Fractures 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Paget's Disease of Bone 
 Browse the Encyclopedia