
 Bone marrow biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bone marrow  biopsy  is the removal of marrow from inside bone. Bone marrow is the soft tissue inside bones that helps form blood cells. It is found in the hollow part of most bones. Bone marrow biopsy is not the same as  bone marrow aspiration . An aspiration removes a small amount of marrow in liquid form for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A bone marrow biopsy may be done in the health care provider's office or in a hospital. The sample may be taken from the pelvic or breast bone. Sometimes, another area is used.  Marrow is removed in the following steps: If needed, you are given medicine to help you relax. The provider cleans the skin and injects numbing medicine into the area and surface of the bone. A biopsy needle is inserted into the bone. The center of the needle is removed and the hollowed needle is moved deeper into the bone. This captures a tiny sample, or core, of bone marrow within the needle.  The sample and needle are removed. Pressure and then a bandage are applied to the skin. A  bone marrow aspiration  may also be done, usually before the biopsy is taken. After the skin is numbed, the needle is inserted into the bone, and a syringe is used to withdraw the liquid bone marrow. If this is done, the needle will be removed and repositioned. Or, another needle may be used for the biopsy. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the provider: 
   If you are allergic to any medicines
    
   What medicines you are taking
    
   If you have bleeding problems
    
   If you are pregnant
    How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel a sharp sting when the numbing medicine is injected. The biopsy needle may also cause a brief, usually dull, pain. Since the inside of the bone cannot be numbed, this test may cause some discomfort. If a bone marrow aspiration is also done, you may feel a brief, sharp pain as the bone marrow liquid is removed. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have abnormal types or numbers of red or white blood cells or platelets on a  complete blood count  (CBC). This test is used to diagnose leukemia, infections, some types of anemia, and other blood disorders. It may also be used to help determine if a cancer has spread or responded to treatment. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means the bone marrow contains the proper number and types of blood-forming (hematopoietic) cells, fat cells, and connective tissues. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to cancers of the bone marrow (leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or other cancers). The results may detect the cause of anemia (too few red blood cells), abnormal white blood cells, or  thrombocytopenia  (too few platelets). Specific conditions for which the test may be performed: A body-wide fungal infection (disseminated coccidioidomycosis) A white blood cell cancer called  hairy cell leukemia 
  Cancer of the lymph tissue ( Hodgkin  or  non-Hodgkin lymphoma ) 
  Bone marrow doesn't make enough blood cells ( aplastic anemia ) 
  Blood cancer called  multiple myeloma Group of disorders in which not enough healthy blood cells are made (myelodysplastic syndrome; MDS) 
  A nerve tissue tumor called  neuroblastoma 
  Bone marrow disease that leads to an abnormal increase in blood cells ( polycythemia vera ) 
  Abnormal protein buildup in tissues and organs ( amyloidosis ) 
  Bone marrow disorder in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue ( myelofibrosis ) Bone marrow produces too many platelets ( thrombocythemia ) White blood cell cancer called  Waldenström macroglobulinemia Risks 
 
 There may be some bleeding at the puncture site. More serious risks, such as serious bleeding or infection, are very rare. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - bone marrow Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Bone biopsy 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Bone marrow aspiration analysis-specimen (biopsy, bone marrow iron stain, iron stain, bone marrow). In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:241-244. Vajpayee N, Graham SS, Bem S. Basic examination of blood and bone marrow. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2017:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Biopsy 
 Cancer 
 CBC blood test 
 Hairy cell leukemia 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Myelofibrosis 
 Neuroblastoma 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Platelet count 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 Acute Myeloid Leukemia 
 Anemia 
 Biopsy 
 Bone Marrow Diseases 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia 
 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 
 Hodgkin Disease 
 Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia