
 Brain herniation 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A brain herniation is when brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid, and blood vessels are moved or pressed away from their usual position inside the skull. Causes 
 
 Brain herniation occurs when something inside the skull produces pressure that moves brain tissues. This is most often the result of brain swelling from a head injury,  stroke , or brain tumor. Brain herniation can be a side effect of tumors in the brain, including: Metastatic brain tumor Primary brain tumor Herniation of the brain can also be caused by other factors that lead to increased pressure inside the skull, including: Collection of pus and other material in the brain, usually from a bacterial or fungal infection ( abscess ) Bleeding in the brain (hemorrhage) Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling ( hydrocephalus ) Strokes that cause brain swelling Swelling after radiation therapy Defect in brain structure, such as a condition called Chiari malformation Brain herniation can occur: Between areas inside the skull, such as those separated by a rigid membrane like the tentorium or falx Through a natural opening at the base of the skull called the foramen magnum Through openings created during brain surgery Symptoms 
 
 Signs and symptoms may include: High blood pressure Irregular or slow pulse Headache Weakness Cardiac arrest (no pulse) Loss of consciousness,  coma Loss of all brainstem reflexes (blinking, gagging, and pupils reacting to light) Respiratory arrest  (no breathing) Wide (dilated) pupils and no movement in one or both eyes Exams and Tests 
 
 A brain and nervous system (neurological) exam shows changes in alertness (consciousness). Depending on the severity of the herniation and the part of the brain that is being pressed on, there will be problems with one or more brain-related reflexes and nerve functions. Tests may include: X-ray of the skull and neck CT scan of the head MRI scan of the head Blood tests if an abscess is suspected Treatment 
 
 Brain herniation is a medical emergency. The goal of treatment is to save the person's life. To help reverse or prevent a brain herniation, the medical team will treat increased swelling and pressure in the brain. Treatment may involve: Placing a drain into the brain to help remove cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Medicines to reduce swelling, especially if there is a brain tumor Medicines that remove fluid from the body, such as mannitol or other diuretics, which reduce pressure inside the skull Placing a tube in the airway ( endotracheal intubation ) and increasing the breathing rate to reduce the levels of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) in the blood Removing blood or blood clots if they are raising pressure inside the skull and causing herniation Removing part of the skull to give the brain more room  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who have a brain herniation have a serious brain injury. They may already have a low chance of recovery due to the injury that caused the herniation. When herniation occurs, it further lowers the chance of recovery. The outlook varies depending on where in the brain the herniation occurs. Without treatment, death is likely. There can be damage to parts of the brain that control breathing and blood flow. This can rapidly lead to death or brain death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain death Permanent and significant neurologic problems  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your local emergency number (such as 911) or take the person to a hospital emergency room if they develop decreased alertness or other symptoms, especially if there has been a head injury or if the person has a brain tumor or blood vessel problem. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of  increased intracranial pressure  and related disorders may reduce the risk for brain herniation. Alternative Names 
 
 Herniation syndrome; Transtentorial herniation; Uncal herniation; Subfalcine herniation; Tonsillar herniation; Herniation - brain Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 Brain hernia 
 References 
 
 Case CS, Shoamanesh A. Intracerebral hemorrhage. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 66. Stippler M. Craniocerebral trauma. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 62. Wang VY, Manley GT. Intracranial pressure monitoring. In: Winn HR, ed.  Youmans Neurological Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 23. Read More 
 
 Brain surgery 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain injury - discharge  
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Brain Tumors 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Stroke 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia