
 Brain surgery 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brain surgery is an operation to treat problems in the brain and surrounding structures. Description 
 
 Before surgery, the hair on part of the scalp is shaved and the area is cleaned. The doctor makes a surgical cut through the scalp. The location of this cut depends on where the problem in the brain is located. The surgeon creates a hole in the skull and removes a bone flap. If possible, the surgeon will make a smaller hole and insert a tube with a light and camera on the end. This is called an endoscope. The surgery will be done with tools placed through the endoscope.  MRI  or  CT  scan can help guide the doctor to the proper place in the brain. During surgery, your surgeon may: Clip off an  aneurysm  to prevent blood flow Remove a  tumor  or a piece of tumor for a  biopsy Remove abnormal brain tissue Drain blood or an infection Free a nerve  The bone flap is usually replaced after surgery, using small metal plates, sutures, or wires. The bone flap may not be put back if your surgery involved a tumor or an infection, or if the brain was swollen. (This is called a craniectomy.) The time it takes for the surgery depends on the problem being treated. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Brain surgery may be done if you have: Brain tumor Bleeding (hemorrhage) in the brain Blood clots  ( hematomas ) in the brain Weaknesses in blood vessels ( brain aneurysm repair ) Abnormal blood vessels in the brain (arteriovenous malformations; AVM) Damage to tissues covering the brain (dura) Infections in the brain ( brain abscesses ) Severe nerve or face pain (such as  trigeminal neuralgia  or  tic douloureux ) Skull fracture Pressure in the brain after an injury or stroke Epilepsy Certain brain diseases (such as Parkinson disease) that may be helped with an implanted electronic device Hydrocephalus Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medications, problems breathing Bleeding, blood clots, infection  Possible risks of brain surgery are: Problems with speech, memory, muscle  weakness , balance, vision, coordination, and other functions. These problems may last a short while or they may not go away. Blood clot or bleeding in the brain Seizures Stroke Coma Infection in the brain, wound, or skull Brain swelling  Before the Procedure 
 
 Your doctor will examine you, and may order laboratory and imaging tests. Tell your doctor or nurse: If you could be pregnant What drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, vitamins, or herbs you bought without a prescription If you have been drinking a lot of alcohol If you take aspirin or anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen If you have allergies or reactions to medications or iodine  During the days before the surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen, warfarin (Coumadin), and any other medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask your doctor which drugs you should still take on the day of the surgery. Try to stop smoking. Smoking can slow healing after your operation. Ask your doctor for help. Your doctor or nurse may ask you to wash your hair with a special shampoo the night before surgery.  On the day of the surgery: You will likely be asked not to drink or eat anything for 8 to 12 hours before the surgery. Take the drugs your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 After surgery, you will be closely monitored by your health care team to make sure your brain is working properly. The doctor or nurse may ask you questions, shine a light in your eyes, and ask you to do simple tasks. You may need oxygen for a few days. The head of your bed will be kept raised to help reduce swelling of your face or head. The swelling is normal after surgery. Medicines will be given to relieve pain. You will usually stay in the hospital for 3 to 7 days. You may need physical therapy (rehabilitation). After you go home, follow any  self-care instructions  you're given.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do after brain surgery depends on the condition being treated, your general health, which part of the brain is involved, and the specific type of surgery. Alternative Names 
 
 Craniotomy; Surgery - brain; Neurosurgery; Craniectomy; Stereotactic craniotomy; Stereotactic brain biopsy; Endoscopic craniotomy Images 
 
 
 Before and after hematoma repair 
 Craniotomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Gasco J, Mohanty A, Hanbali F, Patterson JT. Neurosurgey. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 68. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 Brain abscess 
 Brain aneurysm repair 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Brain tumor - primary - adults 
 Cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 Subdural hematoma  
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Brain aneurysm repair - discharge 
 Brain surgery - discharge 
 Caring for muscle spasticity or spasms  
 Communicating with someone with aphasia 
 Dysarthria - care 
 Epilepsy in children - discharge 
 Epilepsy or seizures - discharge  
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Stroke - discharge  
 Swallowing problems  
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Aneurysm 
 Brain Diseases 
 Brain Malformations 
 Brain Tumors 
 Childhood Brain Tumors 
 Epilepsy 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Parkinson's Disease 
 Stroke 
 Browse the Encyclopedia