
 Breathing difficulty 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Breathing difficulty may involve: Difficult breathing Uncomfortable breathing Feeling like you are not getting enough air Considerations 
 
 There is no standard definition for difficulty breathing. Some people feel breathless with only mild exercise (for example, climbing stairs), even though they do not have a medical condition. Others may have advanced lung disease but may never feel short of breath. Wheezing  is one form of breathing difficulty in which you make a high-pitched sound when you breathe out. Causes 
 
 Shortness of breath has many different causes. For example, heart disease can cause breathlessness if your heart is unable to pump enough blood to supply oxygen to your body. If your brain, muscles, or other body organs do not get enough oxygen, a sense of breathlessness may occur. Breathing difficulty may also be due to problems with the lungs, airways, or other health problems. Problems with the lungs: Blood clot in the arteries of the lungs ( pulmonary embolism ) Bronchiolitis Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD), such as chronic bronchitis or emphysema Other lung disease Pneumonia Pulmonary hypertension Problems with the airways leading to the lungs: Blockage of the air passages in your nose, mouth, or throat Choking on something stuck in the airways Croup Epiglottitis Problems with the heart: Angina Heart attack Heart defects from birth ( congenital heart disease ) Heart failure Heart rhythm disturbances ( arrhythmias )  Other causes: Allergies  (such as to mold, dander, or pollen) High altitudes where there is less oxygen in the air Compression of the chest wall Dust in the environment Emotional distress, such as anxiety Hiatal hernia Obesity Panic attacks Home Care 
 
 Sometimes, mild breathing difficulty may be normal and is not a cause for concern. A very stuffy nose is one example. Strenuous exercise, especially when you do not exercise often, is another example. If breathing difficulty is new or is getting worse, it may be due to a serious problem. Though many causes are not dangerous and are easily treated, call your health care provider for any breathing difficulty. If you are being treated for a long-term problem with your lungs or heart, follow your provider's directions to help with that problem. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if: Breathing difficulty comes on suddenly or seriously interferes with your breathing Someone completely stops breathing  See your provider if any of the following occur with breathing difficulties: Chest discomfort, pain, or pressure. These are symptoms of angina. Fever Shortness of breath after only slight activity or while at rest Shortness of breath that wakes you up at night or requires you to sleep propped up to breathe Tightness in the throat or a barking, croupy cough You have breathed in or choked on an object (foreign object aspiration or ingestion) Wheezing  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms: How long have you had breathing difficulty? Did it start suddenly? Has it gotten worse recently? Is there a sequence of separate episodes? How long does each last, and does each episode have a similar pattern? Does breathing difficulty cause you to wake up at night ( paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea )? Is it worse when you change body position? Did it develop within 4 to 6 hours after exposure to something that you are or may be allergic to ( antigen )? Is it worse after exercise? Do you make grunting or wheezing sounds while breathing?  Tests that may be ordered include: Blood oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry) Blood tests (may include  arterial blood gases ) Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest ECG Echocardiogram Exercise testing Pulmonary function tests If the breathing difficulty is severe, you may need to go to a hospital. You may receive medicines to treat the cause of breathing difficulty. If your blood oxygen level is very low, you may need oxygen. Alternative Names 
 
 Shortness of breath; Breathlessness; Difficulty breathing; Dyspnea Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Emphysema 
 References 
 
 Kraft M. Approach to the patient with respiratory disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 83. Schwartzstein RM, Adams L. Dyspnea. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 29. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulties - first aid 
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 Hyperventilation 
 Lung disease 
 Wheezing 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 How to breathe when you are short of breath 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Oxygen safety 
 Traveling with breathing problems 
 Using oxygen at home 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia