
 Breathing - slowed or stopped 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Breathing that stops from any cause is called apnea. Slowed breathing is called bradypnea. Labored or difficult breathing is known as dyspnea. Considerations 
 
 Apnea can come and go and be temporary. This can occur with obstructive sleep apnea, for example. Prolonged apnea means a person has stopped breathing. If the heart is still active, the condition is known as respiratory arrest. This is a life-threatening event that requires immediate medical attention and first aid. Prolonged apnea with no heart activity in a person who is not responsive is called cardiac (or cardiopulmonary) arrest. In infants and children, the most common cause of cardiac arrest is respiratory arrest. In adults, the opposite usually occurs, cardiac arrest leads to respiratory arrest. Causes 
 
 Breathing difficulty can occur for many different reasons. The most common causes of apnea in infants and small children are usually different from the most common causes in adults. Common causes of breathing difficulties in infants and young children include: Asthma Bronchiolitis  (inflammation and narrowing of the smaller breathing structures in the lungs) Choking Encephalitis  (brain inflammation and infection that affects vital brain functions) Gastroesophageal reflux  (heartburn) Holding one's breath Meningitis  (inflammation and infection of the tissue lining the brain and spinal cord) Pneumonia Premature birth Seizures Common causes of breathing trouble (dyspnea) in adults include: Allergic reaction that causes tongue, throat, or other airway swelling Asthma or other lung diseases Cardiac arrest Choking Drug overdose, especially due to alcohol, narcotic painkillers, barbiturates, anesthetics, and other depressants Fluid in the lungs Obstructive sleep apnea  Other causes of apnea include: Head injury Heart attack Irregular heartbeat Metabolic (body chemical, mineral, and acid-base) disorders Near drowning Stroke and other brain and nervous system (neurological) disorders  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek immediate medical attention or call your local emergency number (such as 911) if a person with any type of breathing problem: Becomes limp Has a seizure Is not alert (loses consciousness) Remains drowsy Turns blue  If a person has stopped breathing, call for emergency help and perform  CPR  (if you know how). When in a public place, look for an Automated External Defibrillator (AED) and follow the directions. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 CPR or other emergency measures will be done in an emergency room or by an ambulance emergency medical technician (EMT) or paramedic. Once the person is stable, the health care provider will do a physical exam, which includes listening to  heart sounds  and breath sounds. Questions will be asked about the person's medical history and symptoms, including: Time pattern Has this ever happened before? How long did the event last? Has the person had repeated, brief episodes of apnea? Did the episode end with a sudden deep, snorting breath? Did the episode occur while awake or asleep?  Recent health history Has the person had a recent accident or injury? Has the person been ill recently? Was there any breathing difficulty before breathing stopped? What other symptoms have you noticed? What medicines does the person take? Does the person use street or recreational drugs?  Diagnostic tests that may be done include: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Medicines to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effects of poisoning or overdose  Alternative Names 
 
 Respiration slowed or stopped; Not breathing; Respiratory arrest; Apnea References 
 
 Donoghue AJ, Berg RA, Nadkarni V. Pediatric resuscitation. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 10. Ward KR, Kurz MC, Neumar RW. Adult resuscitation. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 9. Read More 
 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 
 Review Date 1/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia