
 Breast infection 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A breast infection is an infection in the tissue of the breast. Causes 
 
 Breast infections are usually caused by common bacteria ( Staphylococcus aureus ) found on normal skin. The bacteria enter through a break or crack in the skin, usually on the nipple. The infection takes place in the fatty tissue of the breast and causes  swelling . This swelling pushes on the milk ducts. The result is pain and lumps in the infected breast. Breast infections usually occur in women who are breastfeeding. Breast infections that are not related to breastfeeding might be a rare form of  breast cancer . Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a breast infection may include: Breast enlargement  on one side only Breast lump Breast pain Fever  and flu-like symptoms, including nausea and vomiting Itching Nipple discharge (may contain pus) Swelling , tenderness, redness, and warmth in breast tissue Tender or  enlarged lymph nodes  in armpit on the same side Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform physical exam to rule out complications such as a swollen, pus-filled lump (abscess). Sometimes an ultrasound is done to check for an abscess. For infections that keep returning, milk from the nipple may be cultured. In women who are not breastfeeding, tests done may include:  Breast biopsy Breast MRI Breast ultrasound Mammogram    Treatment 
 
 Self-care may include applying moist heat to the infected breast tissue for 15 to 20 minutes four times a day. You may also need to take pain relievers. Antibiotics are very effective in treating a breast infection. If you take antibiotics, you must continue to breastfeed or pump to relieve breast swelling from milk production. In case if the abscess does not go away, needle aspiration under ultrasound guidance is done, along with antibiotics. If this method fails to respond, then incision and drainage is the treatment of choice. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The condition usually clears quickly with antibiotic therapy.  Possible Complications 
 
 In severe infections, an  abscess  may develop. Abscesses need to be drained, either as an office procedure or with surgery. Women with abscesses may be told to temporarily stop breastfeeding. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Any portion of your breast tissue becomes reddened, tender, swollen, or hot You are breastfeeding and develop a high fever The lymph nodes in your armpit become tender or swollen  Prevention 
 
 The following may help reduce the risk of breast infections: Careful nipple care to prevent irritation and cracking Feeding often and pumping milk to prevent the breast from getting swollen (engorged) Proper breastfeeding technique with good latching by the baby Weaning slowly, over several weeks, rather than quickly stopping breastfeeding Alternative Names 
 
 Mastitis; Infection - breast tissue; Breast abscess Images 
 
 
 Normal female breast anatomy 
 Breast infection 
 Female breast 
 References 
 
 Hunt KK, Mittendorf EA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 34. Jacobs L, Hardin R. Management of benign breast disease. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:565-567. Niebyl JR, Weber RJ, Briggs GG. Drugs and environmental agents in pregnancy and lactation. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 8. Que YA, Moreillon P.  Staphylococcus aureus  (including staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 196. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Breast cancer 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda Center for Fertility, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia