
 Breast enlargement in males 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 When abnormally large breasts develop in males, it is called gynecomastia. It is due to the excess growth of breast tissue, not excess fat tissue. Considerations 
 
 The condition may occur in one or both breasts. It begins as a small lump beneath the nipple, which may be tender. One breast may be larger than the other. Enlarged breasts in males are usually harmless, but may cause embarrassment for some men.  Some newborns may have breast development along with a milky discharge ( galactorrhea ). This condition usually lasts for a couple of weeks. In rare cases, it may last until the child is 2 years old. Causes 
 
 Normal hormone changes are the most common cause of breast development in newborns, boys, and men. There are other causes as well. HORMONE CHANGES Breast enlargement is usually caused by an imbalance of estrogen (female hormone) and testosterone (male hormone). Males have both types of hormones in their body. Changes in the levels of these hormones, or in how the body uses or responds to these hormones, can cause enlarged breasts in males. In newborns, breast growth is caused by being exposed to estrogen from the mother. About half of boy babies are born with enlarged breasts, called breast buds. They usually go away in 2 to 6 months, but can last longer. In preteens and teens, breast growth is caused by normal hormone changes that occur in puberty. More than half of boys develop breasts during puberty. Breast growth often goes away in about 6 months to 2 years. In men, hormone changes due to aging can cause breast growth. This may occur more often in overweight men and in men age 50 and older. HEALTH CONDITIONS Certain health problems can cause breast growth in adult men, including: Chronic liver disease Kidney failure and dialysis Low testosterone level  Obesity Rare causes include: Genetic defects Overactive thyroid  or  underactive thyroid Tumors  MEDICINES AND MEDICAL TREATMENT Some medicines and treatments that can cause breast growth in men include: Cancer chemotherapy Hormone treatment for prostate cancer, such as flutamide (Proscar), or for enlarged prostate, such as finasteride (Propecia) or bicalutamide Radiation treatment of the testicles HIV/AIDS medicines Corticosteroids and anabolic steroids Estrogen (including those in soy products) Heartburn and ulcer medicines, such as cimetidine (Tagamet) or proton pump inhibitors Anti-anxiety medicines, such as diazepam (Valium) Heart medicines, such as spironolactone (Aldactone), digoxin (Lanoxin), amiodarone, and calcium channel blockers Antifungal medicines, such as ketoconazole (Nizoral) Antibiotics such as metronidazole (Flagyl) Tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline (Elavil) Herbals such as lavender, tea tree oil, and dong quai  Opioids DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE Using certain substances can cause breast enlargement: Alcohol Amphetamines Heroin Marijuana Methadone  Men who have enlarged breasts may have an increased risk for  breast cancer . Breast cancer in men is rare. Signs that may suggest breast cancer include: One-sided breast growth Firm or hard breast lump that feels like it is attached to the tissue Skin sore over the breast Bloody discharge from the nipple  Home Care 
 
 For swollen breasts that are tender, applying cold compresses may help. Ask your health care provider if it's OK to take pain relievers. Other tips include: Stop taking all recreational drugs, such as marijuana Stop taking all nutritional supplements or any drugs you are taking for bodybuilding  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have recent swelling, pain, or enlargement in one or both breasts There is dark or bloody discharge from the nipples There is a skin sore or ulcer over the breast A breast lump feels hard or firm  If your son has breast growth but has not yet reached puberty, have it checked by a provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take a medical history and perform a  physical examination . You may not need any tests, but the following tests may be done to rule out certain diseases: Blood  hormone level  tests Breast  ultrasound Liver and kidney function studies Mammogram TREATMENT Often no treatment is needed. Breast growth in newborns and young boys often goes away on its own. If a medical condition is causing the problem, your provider will treat that condition. Your provider will talk with you about medicines or substances that may cause breast growth. Stopping their use or changing medicines will make the problem go away. DO NOT stop taking any medicines before talking to your provider. Breast growth that is extreme, uneven, or does not go away may be embarrassing. Treatments that may be used in rare situations are: Hormone treatment that blocks the effects of estrogens Breast reduction surgery or  liposuction Alternative Names 
 
 Gynecomastia; Breast enlargement in a male Images 
 
 
 Gynecomastia 
 References 
 
 Ali O, Donohue PA. Gynecomastia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 585. Anawalt BD. Gynecomastia. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Sansone A, Romanelli F, Sansone M, Lenzi A, Di Liugi L. Gynecomastia and hormones.  Endocrine . Epub 2016 May 4. PMID: 27145756  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27145756 . Read More 
 
 Liver disease 
 Nipple discharge 
 Substance use 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Robert Hurd, MD, Professor of Endocrinology and Health Care Ethics, Xavier University, Cincinnati, OH. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia