
 Breast milk jaundice 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Jaundice is a condition that causes the skin and whites of the eyes to turn yellow. If jaundice lasts past the first week of life in a breastfed baby who is otherwise healthy, the condition may be called "breast milk jaundice." Causes 
 
 Bilirubin is a yellow pigment that is created as the body gets rid of old red blood cells. The liver helps break down bilirubin so that it can be removed from the body in the stool. It can be normal for newborn babies to be a little yellow between days 1 and 5 of life. The color usually peaks around day 3 or 4. Breast milk jaundice is likely caused by: Factors in a mother's milk that help a baby absorb bilirubin from the intestine Factors that keep certain proteins in the baby's liver from breaking down bilirubin Sometimes jaundice occurs when your baby does not get enough breast milk, instead of from the breast milk itself. Babies who are born early (before 37 or 38 weeks) are not always able to feed well. Breast milk jaundice may also happen when feedings are scheduled by the clock (for example, "every 3 hours for 10 minutes") or when babies who show signs of hunger are given pacifiers. Breast milk jaundice may run in families. It occurs just as often in males and females and affects about a third of all newborns who get only their mother's milk. Symptoms 
 
 Your child's skin, and possibly the whites of the eyes (sclera), will look yellow. Exams and Tests 
 
 Laboratory tests that may be done include: Bilirubin level (total and direct) Blood smear to look at blood cell shapes and sizes Blood typing Complete blood count Reticulocyte count (number of slightly immature red blood cells)  In some cases, a blood test to check for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) may be done. G6PD is a protein that helps red blood cells work properly. These tests are done to be sure that there are no other, more dangerous causes of the jaundice. Treatment 
 
 Treatment will depend on: Your baby's bilirubin level, which naturally rises during the first week of life How fast the bilirubin level has been going up Whether your baby was born early How your baby has been feeding How old your baby is now  Often, the bilirubin level is normal for the baby's age. Newborns normally have higher levels than older children and adults. In this case, no treatment is needed, other than close follow-up. You can prevent the kind of jaundice that is caused by too little breastfeeding by making sure your baby is getting enough milk. Feed about 10 to 12 times each day, starting on the first day. Feed whenever baby is alert, sucking on the hands, and smacking the lips. This is how babies let you know they are hungry. If you wait until your baby cries, feeding will not go as well. Give babies unlimited time at each breast, as long as they are sucking and swallowing steadily. Full babies will relax, unclench their hands, and drift off to sleep.  If breastfeeding is not going well, get help from a lactation consultant or your doctor as soon as possible. Babies born before 37 or 38 weeks usually need extra help. Their moms often need to express or pump to make enough milk while they are learning to breastfeed. Nursing or pumping more often (up to 12 times a day) will increase the amount of milk the baby gets, and can cause the bilirubin level to drop. Ask your doctor before deciding to give your newborn formula. It is best to keep breastfeeding. Babies need their mothers' milk. Although a baby full of formula can be less demanding, formula feeding may cause you to make less milk. If the milk supply is low because baby's demand has been low (for example, if baby was born early), you may have to use formula for a brief time. You should also use a pump to help make more breast milk until baby is better able to nurse. Spending "skin to skin" time can also help babies feed better and help moms make more milk.  In some cases, if babies aren't able to feed well, fluids are given through a vein to help increase their fluid levels and lower bilirubin levels. To help break down the bilirubin if it is too high, your baby may be placed under special blue lights (phototherapy). You may be able to do  phototherapy at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The baby should recover fully with the right monitoring and treatment. The jaundice should go away by 12 weeks of life. Possible Complications 
 
 In true breast milk jaundice, there are usually no complications. However,  babies with very high bilirubin levels  who do not get the right medical care can have severe effects.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you are breastfeeding and your baby's skin or eyes become yellow (jaundiced). Prevention 
 
 Breast milk jaundice cannot be prevented, and it is not harmful. But when a baby's color is yellow, you must have the baby's bilirubin level checked right away. If the bilirubin level is high, it is important to make sure there are no other medical problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperbilirubinemia - breastfeeding; Breast-non-feeding jaundice; Breastfeeding failure jaundice Images 
 
 
 Bili lights 
 Jaundiced infant 
 Infant jaundice 
 References 
 
 Holmes AV, McLeod AY, Bunik M. Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Clinical Protocol #5: Peripartum breastfeeding management for the healthy mother and infant at term, revision 2013.  Breastfeeding Medicine . 2013;8:469-473. PMID: 24320091.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24320091 . Preer GL, Philipp BL. Understanding and managing breast milk jaundice.  Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed . 2011;96:F461-6. PMID: 20688866.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20688866 . Read More 
 
 Bilirubin blood test 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Newborn jaundice - discharge 
 Review Date 12/12/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G. Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia