
 Breast cancer in men 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Breast cancer is cancer that starts in breast tissue. Both males and females have breast tissue. This means that anyone, including men and boys, can develop breast cancer. Breast cancer in men is rare. Male breast cancer accounts for less than 1% of all breast cancers. Causes 
 
 The cause of breast cancer in men is not clear. But there are risk factors that make breast cancer more likely in men: Exposure to radiation Higher estrogen levels due to factors such as heavy drinking,  cirrhosis , obesity, and some medicines to treat  prostate cancer Heredity, such as a family history of breast cancer, mutated  BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene , and certain genetic disorders, such as  Klinefelter syndrome Excess breast tissue ( gynecomastia ) Age. Most men are diagnosed with breast cancer between ages 60 to 70.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of breast cancer in men include: Lump or swelling in the breast tissue. One breast may be  larger than the other . A small lump beneath the nipple. Unusual changes in the nipple or skin around the nipple such as redness, scaling, or puckering. Nipple discharge.  Exams and Tests 
 
 You health care provider will take your medical history and family medical history. You will have a physical exam and a breast exam. Your provider may order other tests, including: A  mammogram Breast ultrasound An  MRI of the breast A blood test to check for signs of cancer If any of the tests suggest cancer, your provider will do a  biopsy  to check for cancer. If cancer is found, your provider will order other tests to find out: How quickly the cancer might grow How likely it is to spread What treatments might be best What are the chances that the cancer might come back The tests may include: Chest x-ray, specifically to see if it has spread to the lungs Bone scan CT scan PET scan Sentinel lymph node biopsy  to check if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes The biopsy and other tests will be used to grade and stage the tumor. The results of those tests will help determine your treatment. Treatment 
 
 Treatment options for breast cancer in men include: Surgery to remove the breast, lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over chest muscles, and chest muscles, if needed Radiation therapy  after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells and to target specific tumors Chemotherapy  to kill cancer cells that have spread to other parts of the body Hormone therapy to block hormones that may help certain types of breast cancer grow  During and after treatment, your provider may ask you to have more tests. This may include tests you had during diagnosis. The follow-up tests will show how the treatment is working. They will also show  if the cancer comes back . Support Groups 
 
 Cancer affects how you feel about yourself and your life. You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have had the same experiences and problems can help you feel less alone. The group can also point you to helpful resources for managing your condition. Ask your provider to help you find a support group of men who have been diagnosed with breast cancer. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The long-term outlook for men with breast cancer is excellent when the cancer is found and treated early.  About 91% of men treated before cancer has spread to other areas of the body are cancer-free after 5 years. Almost 3 out of 4 men treated for cancer that has spread to lymph nodes but not to other areas of the body are cancer-free at 5 years. Men who have cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body have a smaller chance of long-term survival. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include side effects from surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider right away if you notice something unusual about your breast, including any lumps, skin changes, or discharge. Prevention 
 
 There is no clear way to prevent breast cancer in men. The best way to protect yourself is to: Know that men can develop breast cancer Know your risk factors and talk with your provider about screening and early detection with tests if needed Know the possible signs of breast cancer Tell your provider if you notice any changes in your breast  Alternative Names 
 
 Infiltrating ductal carcinoma - male; Ductal carcinoma in situ - male; Intraductal carcinoma - male; Inflammatory breast cancer - male; Paget disease of the nipple - male; Breast cancer - male References 
 
 Brinton LA, Cook MB, McCormack V, et al. Anthropometric and hormonal risk factors for male breast cancer: male breast cancer pooling project results.  J Natl Cancer Inst . 2014;106(3):djt465. PMID: 24552677  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24552677 . Hunt KK, Mittendorf EA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 34. National Cancer Institute. PDQ: male breast cancer treatment - health professional version. Cancer.gov Web site. Updated February 12, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/male-breast-treatment-pdq . Accessed October 17, 2016. 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Male Breast Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia