
 Brief psychotic disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Brief psychotic disorder is a sudden, short-term display of psychotic behavior, such as  hallucinations  or delusions, which occurs with a stressful event. Causes 
 
 Brief psychotic disorder is triggered by extreme stress, such as a traumatic accident or loss of a loved one. It is followed by a return to the previous level of function. The person may or may not be aware of the strange behavior. This condition most often affects people in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. Those who have personality disorders are at high risk of having a brief reactive psychosis. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of brief psychotic disorder may include the following: Behavior that is odd or out of character False ideas about what is taking place (delusions) Hearing or seeing things that aren't real (hallucinations) Strange speech or language  The symptoms are not due to alcohol or other drug use, and they last longer than a day, but less than a month. Exams and Tests 
 
 A psychiatric evaluation can confirm the diagnosis. A physical exam and laboratory testing can rule out medical illness as the cause of the symptoms. Treatment 
 
 By definition, psychotic symptoms go away on their own in less than 1 month. In some cases, brief psychotic disorder can be the beginning of a more chronic psychotic condition, such as  schizophrenia  or  schizoaffective disorder . Antipsychotic drugs can help decrease or stop the psychotic symptoms. Talk therapy may also help you cope with the emotional stress that triggered the problem. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with this disorder have a good outcome. Repeat episodes may occur in response to stress. Possible Complications 
 
 As with all psychotic illnesses, this condition can severely disrupt your life and possibly lead to violence and suicide. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with a mental health professional if you have symptoms of this disorder. If you are concerned for your safety or for the safety of someone else, call the local emergency number (such as 911) or go to the nearest emergency room right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Brief reactive psychosis; Psychosis - brief psychotic disorder References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Freudenriech O, Brown HE, Holt DJ. Psychosis and schizophrenia. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 28. 
 Review Date 2/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Timothy Rogge, MD, Medical Director, Family Medical Psychiatry Center, Kirkland, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Psychotic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia