
 Broken bone 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 If more pressure is put on a bone than it can stand, it will split or break. A break of any size is called a fracture. If the broken bone punctures the skin, it is called an open fracture (compound fracture). A stress fracture is a hairline crack in the bone that develops because of repeated or prolonged forces against the bone. Considerations 
 
 It is hard to tell a  dislocated joint  from a broken bone. However, both are emergency situations, and the basic first aid steps are the same. Causes 
 
 The following are common causes of broken bones: Fall from a height Motor vehicle accidents Direct blow Child abuse Repetitive forces, such as those caused by running, can cause stress fractures of the foot, ankle, tibia, or hip  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a broken bone include: A visibly out-of-place or misshapen limb or joint Swelling, bruising, or bleeding Intense pain Numbness and tingling Broken skin with bone protruding Limited mobility or inability to move a limb  First Aid 
 
 First aid steps include: Check the person's airway and breathing. If necessary, call 911 and begin rescue breathing,  CPR , or  bleeding control . Keep the person still and calm. Examine the person closely for other injuries. In most cases, if medical help responds quickly, allow the medical personnel to take further action. If the skin is broken, it should be treated immediately to prevent infection. Call emergency help right away. DO NOT breathe on the  wound  or probe it. If possible, lightly rinse the wound to remove visible dirt or other contamination, but do not vigorously scrub or flush the wound. Cover with sterile dressings. If needed, immobilize the broken bone with a splint or sling. Possible splints include a rolled up newspaper or strips of wood. Immobilize the area both above and below the injured bone. Apply ice packs to reduce pain and swelling. Take steps to prevent  shock . Lay the person flat, elevate the feet about 12 inches (30 centimeters) above the head, and cover the person with a coat or blanket. However, DO NOT move the person if a head, neck, or back injury is suspected.  CHECK BLOOD CIRCULATION Check the person's blood circulation. Press firmly over the skin beyond the fracture site. (For example, if the fracture is in the leg, press on the foot). It should first blanch white and then "pink up" in about two seconds. Signs that circulation is inadequate include pale or blue skin, numbness or tingling, and loss of pulse. If circulation is poor and trained personnel are NOT quickly available, try to realign the limb into a normal resting position. This will reduce swelling, pain, and damage to the tissues from lack of blood. TREAT BLEEDING Place a dry, clean cloth over the wound to dress it.  If the bleeding continues, apply direct pressure to the site of bleeding. DO NOT apply a tourniquet to the extremity to stop the bleeding unless it is life-threatening.  DO NOT 
 
 DO NOT move the person unless the broken bone is stable.
 DO NOT move a person with an injured hip, pelvis, or upper leg unless it is absolutely necessary. If you must move the person, pull the person to safety by his clothes (such as by the shoulders of a shirt, a belt, or pant-legs).
 DO NOT move a person who has a possible spine injury.
 DO NOT attempt to straighten a bone or change its position unless blood circulation appears hampered.
 DO NOT try to reposition a suspected spine injury.
 DO NOT test a bone's ability to move. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 if: The person is not responding or is losing consciousness. There is a suspected broken bone in the head, neck, or back. There is a suspected broken bone in the hip, pelvis, or upper leg. You cannot completely immobilize the injury at the scene by yourself. There is severe bleeding. An area below the injured joint is pale, cold, clammy, or blue. There is a bone projecting through the skin.  Even though other broken bones may not be medical emergencies, they still deserve medical attention. Call your health care provider to find out where and when to be seen. If a young child refuses to put weight on an arm or leg after an accident, won't move the arm or leg, or you can clearly see a deformity, assume the child has a broken bone and get medical help. Prevention 
 
 Take the following steps to reduce your risk of a broken bone: Wear protective gear while skiing, biking, roller blading, and participating in contact sports. This includes using a helmet, elbow pads, knee pads, and shin pads. Create a safe home for young children. Place a gate at stairways and keep windows closed. Teach children how to be safe and look out for themselves. Supervise children carefully. There is no substitute for supervision, no matter how safe the environment or situation appears to be. Prevent falls by not standing on chairs, counter tops, or other unstable objects. Remove throw rugs and electrical cords from floor surfaces. Use handrails on staircases and non-skid mats in bathtubs. These steps are especially important for the elderly.  Alternative Names 
 
 Bone - broken; Fracture; Stress fracture; Bone fracture Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Fracture types (1) 
 Fracture, forearm - x-ray 
 External fixation device 
 Fractures across a growth plate 
 Internal fixation devices 
 Fracture types (2) 
 Osteoclast 
 Bone fracture repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Geiderman JM, Katz D. General principles of orthopedic injuries. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 49. Wells L, Sehgal K, Dormans JP. Common fractures. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme III JW, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 675. Read More 
 
 Hip fracture surgery 
 Leg MRI scan 
 Osteonecrosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Femur fracture repair - discharge 
 Hip fracture - discharge  
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fractures 
 Browse the Encyclopedia