
 Bronchitis - acute 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute bronchitis is swelling and inflamed tissue in the main passages that carry air to the lungs. This swelling narrows the airways, which makes it harder to breathe. Other symptoms of bronchitis are a cough and coughing up mucus. Acute means the symptoms have been present only for a short time. Causes 
 
 When acute bronchitis occurs, it almost always comes after having a cold or flu-like illness. The bronchitis infection is caused by a virus. At first, it affects your nose, sinuses, and throat. Then it spreads to the airways that lead to your lungs. Sometimes, bacteria also infect your airways. This is more common in people with  COPD . Chronic bronchitis  is a long-term condition. To be diagnosed with chronic bronchitis, you must have a cough with mucus on most days for at least 3 months. Symptoms 
 
 Some symptoms of acute bronchitis are: Chest discomfort Cough that produces mucus -- the mucus may be clear or yellow-green Fatigue Fever  -- usually low-grade Shortness of breath  that gets worse with activity Wheezing , in people with asthma  Even after acute bronchitis has cleared, you may have a dry, nagging cough that lasts for 1 to 4 weeks. Sometimes it can be hard to know if you have  pneumonia  or bronchitis. If you have pneumonia, you are more likely to have a high fever and chills, feel sicker, or be more short of breath. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will listen to the breathing sounds in your lungs with a stethoscope. Your breathing may sound abnormal or rough.  Tests may include: Chest x-ray , if your provider suspects pneumonia Pulse oximetry, a painless test that helps determine the amount of oxygen in your blood by using a device placed on the end of your finger  Treatment 
 
 Most people DO NOT need antibiotics for acute bronchitis. The infection will almost always go away on its own within 1 week. Doing these things may help you feel better: Drink plenty of fluids. If you have asthma or another chronic lung condition, use your inhaler. Get plenty of rest. Take aspirin or acetaminophen if you have a fever. DO NOT give aspirin to children. Breathe moist air by using a humidifier or steaming up the bathroom. Certain medicines that you can buy without a prescription can help break up or loosen mucus. Look for the word "guaifenesin" on the label. Ask the pharmacist for help finding it. If your symptoms do not improve or if you are wheezing, your provider may prescribe an inhaler to open your airways. If your provider thinks you also have bacteria in your airways, they may prescribe antibiotics. This medicine will only get rid of bacteria, not viruses. Your provider may also prescribe corticosteroid medicine to reduce swelling in your lungs. If you have the flu and it is caught in the first 48 hours after getting sick, your provider might also prescribe antiviral medicine. Other tips include: DO NOT smoke. Avoid secondhand smoke and air pollution. Wash your hands (and your children's hands) often to avoid spreading viruses and other germs. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Except for the cough, symptoms usually go away in 7 to 10 days if you do not have a lung disorder.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you: Have a cough on most days, or have a cough that keeps returning Are coughing up blood Have a high fever or shaking chills Have a low-grade fever for 3 or more days Have thick, yellow-green mucus, especially if it has a bad smell Feel short of breath or have chest pain Have a chronic illness, like heart or lung disease  Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Bronchitis 
 Causes of acute bronchitis 
 Causes of chronic bronchitis 
 COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder) 
 References 
 
 Davids S, Schapira RM. The respiratory system: acute bronchitis. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Ferri FF. Acute bronchitis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:section 1. Walsh EE. Acute bronchitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 66. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Asthma 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Cough 
 Respiratory 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 COPD - what to ask your doctor  
 Using oxygen at home - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 1/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acute Bronchitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia