
 Bruise 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bruise is an area of skin discoloration. A bruise occurs when small blood vessels break and leak their contents into the soft tissue beneath the skin. Considerations 
 
 There are three types of bruises: Subcutaneous -- beneath the skin Intramuscular -- within the belly of the underlying muscle Periosteal -- bone bruise Bruises can last from days to months. A bone bruise is the most severe and painful. Causes 
 
 Bruises are often caused by falls, sports injuries, car accidents, or blows received from other people or objects. If you take a blood thinner, such as aspirin or warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix), you are likely to bruise more easily. Symptoms 
 
 Main symptoms are pain, swelling, and skin discoloration. The bruise begins as a pinkish red color that can be very tender to touch. It is often difficult to use the muscle that has been bruised. For example, a deep thigh bruise is painful when you walk or run. Eventually, the bruise changes to a bluish color, then greenish-yellow, and finally returns to the normal skin color as it heals. First Aid 
 
 Place ice on the bruise to help it heal faster and to reduce swelling. Wrap the ice in a clean towel -- do not place ice directly on the skin. Apply the ice for up to 15 minutes each hour. Keep the bruised area raised above the heart, if possible. This helps keep blood from pooling in the bruised tissue. Try to rest the bruised body part by not overworking your muscles in that area. If needed, take acetaminophen (Tylenol) to help reduce pain. In the rare case of compartment syndrome, surgery is often done to relieve the extreme buildup of pressure. DO NOT 
 
 Do not try to drain the bruise with a needle.
 Do not continue running, playing, or otherwise using the painful, bruised part of your body.
 Do not ignore the pain or swelling. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you feel extreme pressure in a bruised part of your body, especially if the area is large or very painful. This may be due to a condition known as compartment syndrome. Increased pressure on the soft tissues and structures beneath the skin can decrease the supply of blood and oxygen to the tissues. This can be life-threatening and you should receive emergency care. Also call your provider if: You are bruising without any injury, fall, or other reason. There are signs of infection around the bruised area including streaks of redness, pus or other drainage, or fever. Prevention 
 
 Because bruises are usually the direct result of an injury, the following are important safety recommendations: Teach children how to be safe.
  Be mindful to avoid falls around the house. For example, be careful when climbing on ladders or other objects. Avoid standing or kneeling on counter tops.
  Wear seat belts in motor vehicles.
  Wear proper sports equipment to pad those areas most frequently bruised, such as thigh pads, hip guards, and elbow pads in football and hockey; shin guards and knee pads in soccer and basketball. Alternative Names 
 
 Contusion; Hematoma Images 
 
 
 Bone bruise 
 Muscle bruise 
 Skin bruise 
 Bruise healing - series 
 References 
 
 Buttaravoli P, Leffler SM. Contusion. In: Buttaravoli P, Leffler SM.  Minor Emergencies . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 137. Safran MR, Zachazewski J, Stone DA. Contusions. In: Safran MR, Zachazewski J, Stone DA.  Instructions for Sports Medicine Patients . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:266-267. 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bruises 
 Browse the Encyclopedia