
 Byssinosis  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Byssinosis is a disease of the lungs brought on by breathing in cotton dust or dusts from other vegetable fibers such as flax, hemp, or sisal while at work. Causes 
 
 Breathing in (inhaling) the dust produced by raw cotton can cause byssinosis. It is most common in people who work in the textile industry. Those who are sensitive to the dust can have an  asthma-like condition  after being exposed. Methods of prevention in the United States have reduced the number of cases. Byssinosis is still common in developing countries. Smoking increases risk of developing this disease. Being exposed to the dust many times can lead to chronic (long-term) lung disease and shortness of breath or wheezing. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest tightness Cough Wheezing Symptoms are worse at the beginning of the work week and improve later in the week. Symptoms are also less severe when the person is away from the workplace.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will take a detailed medical history and ask you many questions to find out whether your symptoms relate to certain exposures or times of exposure. The provider will also do a physical exam, paying special attention to the lungs. Tests that may be ordered include: Chest x-ray CT scan chest Pulmonary function tests Treatment 
 
 The most important treatment is to stop being exposed to the dust. Reducing dust levels in the factory (by improving machinery or ventilation) will help prevent byssinosis. Some people may have to change jobs to avoid further exposure. Medicines used for asthma, such as bronchodilators, usually improve symptoms. Corticosteroid drugs may be prescribed in more severe cases. Stopping smoking is very important for people with this condition. Breathing treatments, including nebulizers, may be prescribed if the condition becomes long-term. Home oxygen therapy may be needed if blood oxygen level is low. Physical exercise programs, breathing exercises, and patient education programs are often helpful for people with a chronic  lung disease . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms usually improve after stopping exposure to the dust. Continued exposure can lead to reduced lung function. In the United States, worker's compensation may be available to people with byssinosis. Possible Complications 
 
 Chronic bronchitis may develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of byssinosis. Prevention 
 
 Controlling dust, using face masks, and other measures can reduce the risk. Stop smoking, especially if you work in textile manufacturing. Alternative Names 
 
 Cotton worker's lung; Cotton bract disease; Mill fever; Brown lung disease Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 References 
 
 Cowie RL, Becklake MR. Pneumoconioses. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 73. Tarlo SM. Occupational lung disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Occupational asthma 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Interstitial Lung Diseases 
 Occupational Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia