
 Calcium - ionized 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ionized calcium is calcium in your blood that is not attached to proteins. It is also called free calcium. All cells need calcium in order to work. Calcium helps build strong bones and teeth. It is important for heart function. It also helps with muscle contraction, nerve signaling, and blood clotting. This article discusses the test used to measure the amount of ionized calcium in blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink for at least 6 hours before the test.  Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have signs of kidney or parathyroid disease. The test may also be done to monitor progress and treatment of these diseases. Most of the time, blood tests measure your total calcium level. This looks at both ionized calcium and calcium attached to proteins. You may need to have a separate ionized calcium test if you have factors that increase or decrease total calcium levels. These may include abnormal blood levels of albumin or immunoglobulins. Normal Results 
 
 Children: 4.8 to 5.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 1.20 to 1.32 millimoles per liter (millimol/L) Adults: 4.8 to 5.6 mg/dL or 1.20 to 1.40 millimol/L Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Higher-than-normal levels of ionized calcium may be due to: Decreased levels of calcium in the urine from an unknown cause Hyperparathyroidism Hyperthyroidism Milk-alkali syndrome Multiple myeloma Paget disease Sarcoidosis Thiazide diuretics Thrombocytosis (high platelet count) Tumors Vitamin A excess Vitamin D  excess  Lower-than-normal levels may be due to: Hypoparathyroidism Malabsorption Osteomalacia Pancreatitis Renal failure Rickets Vitamin D deficiency  Alternative Names 
 
 Free calcium; Ionized calcium Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia, and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 245. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Albumin - blood (serum) test 
 Bone tumor 
 Calcium blood test 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Malabsorption 
 Milk-alkali syndrome 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Osteomalacia 
 Paget disease of the bone 
 Rickets 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Vitamin D 
 
 Review Date 5/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Calcium 
 Kidney Tests 
 Parathyroid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia