
 Calcium carbonate overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Calcium carbonate is commonly found in antacids (for heartburn) and some dietary supplements. Calcium carbonate overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of a product containing this substance. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Calcium carbonate can be dangerous in large amounts.  Where Found 
 
 Some products that contain calcium carbonate are certain: Antacids (Tums, Chooz) Mineral supplements Hand lotions Vitamin and mineral supplements Other products may also contain calcium carbonate. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a calcium carbonate overdose include: Abdominal pain Bone pain Coma Confusion Constipation Depression Diarrhea Headache Irregular heartbeat Muscle twitching Nausea Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready:  Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) When it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood tests may be done. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Calcium carbonate is not very poisonous. Recovery is quite likely. But, long-term overuse is more serious than a single overdose, because it can cause kidney damage. Few people die from an antacid overdose.  Keep all medicines in child-proof bottles and out of the reach of children. Alternative Names 
 
 Tums overdose; Calcium overdose References 
 
 Pfennig CL, Slovis CM. Electrolyte disorders. In: Marks, JA. ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 125. Raasch RH. Pharmacology of antimicrobials, antifungals, and antivirals. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 155. Shoenberger,JM. Constipation. In: Marks, JA. ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 32. 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia