
 Camphor overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Camphor is a white substance with a strong odor, commonly associated with Vicks VapoRub. Camphor overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medication. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Camphor Menthol  Where Found 
 
 Camphorated oil Some moth repellents Topical pain relievers Vicks VapoRub Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Anxiety Burning of the mouth or the throat Convulsions Excessive thirst Excitation Hallucinations Muscle spasms Nausea and vomiting Rapid pulse Restlessness or agitation Rigid muscles Skin irritation Slow breathing Somnolence (sleepiness) Thirst Tremors (unintentional trembling) Twitching facial muscles Unconsciousness Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known) When it was swallowed The amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room  
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms (such as seizures) will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal (used if other substances were taken along with the camphor, since activated charcoal does not adsorb camphor very well) Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Alternative Names 
 
 Vicks VapoRub overdose References 
 
 American Association of Poison Control Centers. Practice Guideline: Camphor poisoning: An evidence-based practice guideline for out-of-hospital management.  Clinical Toxicology . 2006: Vol. 44;pp. 357-370. Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Sue Y-J, Pinkert H. Baby powder, borates and camphor. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ,eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia PA. Elsevier Saunders; 2007;chap  
 Review Date 1/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia