
 Candles poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Candles are made out of wax. Candle poisoning occurs when someone swallows candle wax. This can happen by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substances in candles that can be harmful are: Beeswax Paraffin wax Man-made (synthetic) wax Vegetable oil based wax Symptoms 
 
 Candle wax is considered nonpoisonous, but it may cause a  blockage in the intestines  if a large amount is swallowed. Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 A trip to the emergency room may not be necessary. If medical care is needed, the provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive a laxative to help the wax move quickly through the stomach and intestines. This will help prevent a bowel blockage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Candle wax is considered nonpoisonous, and recovery is very likely. How well someone does depends on how much wax they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. References 
 
 Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia