
 Canker sore 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A canker sore is a painful, open sore in the mouth. Canker sores are white or yellow and surrounded by a bright red area. They are not cancerous. A canker sore is not the same as a  fever blister  (cold sore). Causes 
 
 Canker sores are a common form of  mouth ulcer . They may occur with viral infections. In some cases, the cause is unknown. Canker sores may also be linked to problems with the body's immune system. The sores may also be brought on by:  Mouth injury from dental work Cleaning the teeth too roughly Biting the tongue or cheek  Other things that can trigger canker sores include: Emotional stress Lack of certain vitamins and minerals in the diet (especially iron,  folic acid , or  vitamin B-12 ) Hormonal changes Food allergies Anyone can develop a canker sore. Women are more likely to get them than men. Canker sores may run in families. Symptoms 
 
 Canker sores most often appear on the inner surface of the cheeks and lips, tongue, upper surface of the mouth, and the base of the gums. Symptoms include: One or more painful, red spots or bumps that develops into an open ulcer White or yellow center Small size (most often under one third inch or 1 centimeter across) Gray color as healing starts Less common symptoms include: Fever General discomfort or uneasiness (malaise) Swollen lymph nodes Pain often goes away in 7 to 10 days. It can take 1 to 3 weeks for a canker sore to completely heal. Large ulcers can take longer to heal. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can often make the diagnosis by looking at the sore. If canker sores persist or continue to return, tests should be done to look for other causes, such as  erythema multiforme ,  drug allergies , herpes infection, and bullous  lichen planus . You may need further testing or a  biopsy  to look for other causes of mouth ulcers. Canker sores are not cancer and do not cause cancer. There are types of cancer, however, that may first appear as a mouth ulcer that does not heal.  Treatment 
 
 In most cases, the canker sores go away without treatment. Try not to eat hot or spicy foods, which can cause pain. Use over-the-counter medicines that ease pain in the area. Rinse your mouth with salt water or mild, over-the-counter mouthwashes. (DO NOT use mouthwashes that contain alcohol which can irritate the area more.) Apply a mixture of half hydrogen peroxide and half water directly to the sore using a cotton swab. Follow by dabbing a small amount of Milk of Magnesia on the canker sore afterward. Repeat these steps 3 to 4 times a day. Rinse your mouth with a mixture of half Milk of Magnesia and half Benadryl liquid allergy medicine. Swish mixture in the mouth for about 1 minute and then spit out.  Medicines prescribed by your provider may be needed for severe cases. These may include: Chlorhexidine mouthwash Stronger medicines called corticosteroids that are placed on the sore or are taken in pill form  Brush your teeth twice a day and floss your teeth every day. Also, get routine dental check-ups. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Canker sores almost always heal on their own. The pain should decrease in a few days. Other symptoms disappear in 10 to 14 days. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: A canker sore or mouth ulcer does not go away after 2 weeks of home care or gets worse. You get canker sores more than 2 or 3 times a year. You have symptoms with the canker sore such as fever, diarrhea, headache, or skin rash.  Alternative Names 
 
 Aphthous ulcer; Ulcer - aphthous Images 
 
 
 Canker sore 
 Mouth anatomy 
 Canker sore (aphthous ulcer) 
 Fever blister 
 References 
 
 Chattopadhyay A, Shetty, KV. Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis.  Otolaryngological Clinics of North America . 2011;44(1):79-88. PMID: 21093624  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21093624 .  Daniels TE, Jordan RC. Diseases of the mouth and salivary glands In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 425. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Cellulitis 
 Erosion 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Food allergy 
 Herpetic stomatitis 
 Ludwig’s angina 
 Malaise 
 Mouth ulcers 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Vitamin B12 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Airway, Voice, and Swallowing Disorders, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Canker Sores 
 Browse the Encyclopedia