
 Caplan syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Caplan syndrome is swelling (inflammation) and scarring of the lungs. It occurs in people with  rheumatoid arthritis  who have breathed in mining dust that contains coal. This lung disease is also called  coal worker's pneumoconiosis . Causes 
 
 Caplan syndrome is caused by breathing in coal mining dust. This causes inflammation and can lead to the formation of many small lumps in the lungs and an airway disease similar to mild asthma. Some people who have been exposed to coal dust have severe lung scarring that makes it difficult for their lungs to carry oxygen to their bloodstream (called progressive massive fibrosis). People with rheumatoid arthritis do not seem more likely to have this complication. Caplan syndrome is very rare in the United States. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Caplan syndrome are: Cough Joint swelling  and pain Lumps under the skin (rheumatoid nodules) Shortness of breath Wheezing  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will take a detailed medical history. It will include questions about your jobs (past and present) and other possible sources of exposure to mining dust. Your provider will also do a physical exam, paying special attention to any joint and skin disease. Other tests can include: Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Joint x-rays Pulmonary function tests Rheumatoid factor  test and other blood tests Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for Caplan syndrome, other than treating any lung and joint disease. Support Groups 
 
 Attending a support group with people who have the same disease or a similar disease can help you understand your condition better. It can also help you adjust to your treatment and lifestyle changes. Support groups take place online and in person. Ask your provider about a support group that might help you.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Caplan syndrome rarely causes serious breathing trouble or disability due to lung problems. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur from Caplan syndrome: Increased risk for tuberculosis Scarring in the lungs (progressive massive fibrosis) Side effects from medicines you take When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of Caplan syndrome. Prevention 
 
 People with rheumatoid arthritis should avoid exposure to coal dust. Alternative Names 
 
 Rheumatoid pneumoconiosis Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Corte TJ, Du Bois RM, Wells AU. Connective tissue diseases. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 65. Cowie RL, Becklake MR. Pneumoconioses. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 73. Raghu G. Interstitial lung disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 92. Tarlo SM. Occupational lung disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Interstitial Lung Diseases 
 Occupational Health 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia