
 Carbon monoxide poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Carbon monoxide is an odorless gas that causes thousands of deaths each year in North America. Breathing in carbon monoxide is very dangerous. It is the leading cause of poisoning death in the United States. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Carbon monoxide is a chemical produced from the incomplete burning of natural gas or other products containing carbon. Where Found 
 
 The following items may produce carbon monoxide: Anything that burns coal, gasoline, kerosene, oil, propane, or wood Automobile engines Charcoal grills (charcoal should never be burned indoors) Indoor and portable heating systems Portable  propane  heaters Stoves (indoor and camp stoves) Water heaters that use natural gas  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 When you breathe in carbon monoxide, the poison replaces the oxygen in your bloodstream. Your heart, brain, and body will become starved of oxygen. Symptoms vary from person to person. Those at high risk include young children, the elderly, people with lung or heart disease, people who are at high altitudes, and smokers. Carbon monoxide can harm a fetus (unborn baby still in the womb). Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning may include: Breathing problems, including no breathing,  shortness of breath , or  rapid breathing Chest pain  (may occur suddenly in people with  angina ) Coma Confusion Convulsions Dizziness Drowsiness Fainting Fatigue General weakness and achiness Headache Hyperactivity Impaired judgment Irritability Low blood pressure Muscle weakness Rapid or abnormal heartbeat Shock Nausea and vomiting Unconsciousness Animals can also be poisoned by carbon monoxide. People who have pets at home may notice that their animals become weak or unresponsive from carbon monoxide exposure. Often the pets will get sick before humans. Home Care 
 
 If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air. Seek immediate medical help. PREVENTION Install a carbon monoxide detector on each floor of your home. Place an additional detector near any major gas-burning appliances (such as a furnace or water heater). Many carbon monoxide poisonings occur in the winter months when furnaces, gas fireplaces, and portable heaters are being used and windows are closed. Have heaters and gas-burning appliances regularly inspected to make sure they are safe to use. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) How long they may have been exposed to the carbon monoxide, if known  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Hyperbaric oxygen therapy  (high-pressure oxygen given in a special chamber) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning can cause death. For those who survive, recovery is slow. How well a person does depends on the amount and length of exposure to the carbon monoxide. Permanent brain damage may occur. If the person still has impaired mental ability after 2 weeks, the chance of a complete recovery is not very good. Impaired mental ability can reappear after a person has been symptom-free for 1 to 2 weeks. References 
 
 Kao LW. Toxicity associated with carbon monoxide.  Clin Lab Med . 2006;26(1):99-125. PMID: 16567227  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16567227 . Nelson LS, Hoffman RS. Inhaled toxins. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 159. Sather JE, Tantawy H. Toxins.  Anesthesiol Clin North America . 2006;24(3):647-70. PMID: 17240611  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17240611 . 
 Review Date 1/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carbon Monoxide Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia