
 Carbohydrates 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Carbohydrates are one of the main nutrients in our diet. They help provide energy for our body. There are three main types of carbohydrates found in foods: sugars, starches, and  fiber . People with diabetes often need to  count the amount of carbohydrates  they eat. Function 
 
 Your body needs all three forms of carbohydrates to function properly. Sugars and starches are broken down by the body into glucose (blood sugar) to be used as energy. Fiber is the part of food that is not broken down by the body. Fiber helps you to feel full and can help you stay at a healthy weight. There are two types of fiber.  Insoluble fiber  adds bulk to your stools so you stay regular.  Soluble fiber  helps lower cholesterol levels and can help improve blood glucose control. Food Sources 
 
 Many different types of foods contain one or more type of carbohydrate. SUGARS Sugar occurs naturally in these nutrient-rich foods: Fruits Milk and milk products Some foods have added sugar. Many packaged and refined foods contain added sugar. These include: Candy Cookies, cakes, and pastries Regular (non-diet) carbonated beverages, such as soda Heavy syrups, such as those added to canned fruit Refined foods with added sugar provide calories, but they lack vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Because they lack nutrients, these foods provide "empty calories" and can lead to weight gain. It's best to eat foods without added sugar. STARCHES These nutrient-rich foods are high in starch. Many are also high in fiber: Canned and dried beans, such as kidney beans, black beans, pinto beans, black-eyed peas, split peas, and garbanzo beans Starchy vegetables, such as potatoes, corn, green peas, and parsnips Whole grains, such as brown rice, oats, barley, and quinoa  Refined grains, such as those found in pastries, white bread, crackers, and white rice also contain starch. However, they lack B vitamins and other important nutrients unless they are marked "enriched." Foods made with refined or "white" flour also contain less fiber and protein than whole-grain products, and do not help you feel as satisfied. FIBER High-fiber foods include: Whole grains, such as whole wheat and brown rice as well as whole-grain breads, cereals, and crackers Beans and legumes, such as black beans, kidney beans, and garbanzo beans Vegetables, such as broccoli, Brussels sprouts, corn, potato with skin Fruits, such as raspberries, pears, apples, and figs Nuts and seeds Most processed and refined foods, enriched or not, are low in fiber. Side Effects 
 
 Eating too many carbohydrates in the form of processed, starchy, or sugary foods can cause an increase in total calories. This can lead to  weight gain . Severely restricting carbohydrates can cause ketosis. This is when the body uses fat for energy because there are not enough carbohydrates from food for the body to use for energy. Recommendations 
 
 It is best to get most of your carbohydrates from whole foods. In addition to calories, whole foods provide vitamins, minerals, and fiber. By making smart food choices, you can get the full range of healthy carbohydrates and plenty of nutrients: Choose a variety of unprocessed foods. These include whole grains, fresh or frozen fruits and vegetables, canned or fresh beans and legumes, and low-fat or non-fat dairy products. Read labels on canned, packaged, and frozen foods to avoid added sugar, salt, and fat. Make half of your grain servings per day from whole grains. If you eat refined grains, make sure they are enriched. Choose whole fruits and 100% fruit juices with little to no added sugar. Make at least half of your daily fruit servings from whole fruits. Limit sweets, sugar-sweetened beverages, and alcohol. Limit added sugars to less than 10 percent of calories per day. Here are recommended serving sizes for foods that are high in carbohydrates: Starchy vegetables: 1 cup (230 grams) mashed potato or sweet potato, 1 small ear of corn Fruits: 1 medium-size fruit (such as 1 medium apple or 1 medium orange), 1/2 cup (120 grams) of frozen or chopped fruit, or 3/4 cup (185 milliliters) of fruit juice Breads and cereals: 1 slice of whole-grain bread; 1 ounce (30 grams) or 2/3 cup (60 grams) of whole-grain cereal; 1/2 cup (100 grams) of cooked brown rice, pasta, or cereal; 1/2 cup (85 grams) of cooked dried beans, lentils, or dried peas Dairy: 1 cup (240 milliliters) of skim or low-fat milk or 8 ounces (225 grams) plain yogurt The  food guide plate  recommends filling half of your plate with fruits and vegetables, and one-third of your plate with grains, at least half of which are whole grains. Here is a sample 2,000-calorie menu with healthy carbohydrate choices: BREAKFAST 1 cup (60 grams) shredded wheat cereal, topped with 1 tbsp (10 g) raisins and one cup (240 milliliters) fat-free milk 1 small banana 1 hard-boiled egg LUNCH Smoked turkey sandwich, made with 2 ounces (55 grams) whole-wheat pita bread, 1/4 cup (12 grams) romaine lettuce, 2 slices tomato, 3 ounces (85 grams) sliced smoked turkey breast 1 teaspoon (tsp) or 5 milliliters (mL) mayonnaise-type salad dressing 1 tsp (2 g) yellow mustard 1 medium pear  1 cup (240 milliliters) tomato juice DINNER 5 ounces (140 grams) grilled top loin steak 3/4 cup (190 grams) mashed sweet potato 2 tsp (10 g) soft margarine 1 cup (30 grams) spinach salad 2 ounce (55 grams) whole-wheat dinner roll 1 tsp (5 g) soft margarine 1 cup (240 milliliters) fat-free milk 1 cup (240 milliliters) unsweetened applesauce SNACK 1 cup (225 grams) low-fat plain yogurt with strawberries on top Alternative Names 
 
 Starches; Simple sugars; Sugars; Complex carbohydrates; Diet - carbohydrates; Simple carbohydrates Images 
 
 
 Complex carbohydrates 
 Simple carbohydrates 
 Starchy foods 
 References 
 
 Abumrad NA, Nassi F, Marcus A. Digestion and absorption of dietary fat, carbohydrate, and protein. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 102. Baynes JW. Carbohydrates and lipids. In: Baynes JW, Dominiczak MH, eds.  Medical Biochemistry.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 3. Sacks DB. Carbohydrates. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood  ER, Bruns DE, eds.  Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 26. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture.  2015 – 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.  8th Edition. December 2015.  health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ . Accessed February 8, 2016. Read More 
 
 Fiber 
 
 Review Date 2/9/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 Browse the Encyclopedia