
 Cardiac glycoside overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cardiac glycosides are medicines for treating heart failure and certain irregular heartbeats. Cardiac glycoside overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.  Cardiac glycosides are found in the leaves of the digitalis (foxglove) plant. This plant is the original source of this medicine. People who eat a large amount of these leaves may develop symptoms of an  overdose . Long-term (chronic) poisoning can occur in people who take cardiac glycosides every day. This can happen if someone develops kidney problems or becomes dehydrated (especially in the hot summer months). This problem usually occurs in older people. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Cardiac glycoside is a chemical that has effects on the heart, stomach, intestines, and nervous system. It is the active ingredient in many different heart medicines. It can be poisonous if taken in large amounts. Where Found 
 
 Cardiac glycosides are found in the prescription medicines listed below. The brand names are in parentheses: Deslanoside (Cedilanin-D) Digitoxin (Crystodigin) Digoxin (Lanoxicaps, Lanoxin)  Besides the foxglove plant, cardiac glycosides also occur naturally in plants such as Lily-of-the-Valley,  foxglove , and  oleander . In addition to these plants, other plants may also contain cardiac glycosides. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may be vague, especially in the older people. The symptoms below may occur in different parts of the body. The ones with an asterisk (*) next to them usually occur only in chronic overdoses. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT  Blurred vision Halos around objects (yellow, green, white) *  SKIN  Allergic reaction, including possible  Stevens-Johnson syndrome Hives Rash STOMACH AND INTESTINES Diarrhea Loss of appetite* Nausea and vomiting Stomach pain HEART AND BLOOD  Irregular heartbeat  (or slow heartbeat) Weakness NERVOUS SYSTEM  Confusion Depression* Disorientation Drowsiness Fainting Hallucinations* Headache Lethargy MENTAL HEALTH  Apathy  (not caring about anything) Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG  (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxatives Medicine to treat symptoms Pacemaker to the heart for serious heart rhythm disturbances Renal dialysis (kidney machine) in severe cases  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Reduced heart function and heart rhythm disturbances can cause poor outcomes. Death can occur, especially in young children and older adults. Older people are especially likely to suffer from problems of long-term (chronic) cardiac glycoside poisoning. Alternative Names 
 
 Digoxin overdose; Digitoxin overdose; Lanoxin overdose; Purgoxin overdose; Allocar overdose; Corramedan overdose; Crystodigin overdose References 
 
 Cole JB, Roberts DJ. Cardiovascular drugs. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 152. Ferri FF. Digoxin overdose. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:section I. Lapostolle F, Borron SW. Digitalis. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 58. 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia