
 Cardiac amyloidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cardiac amyloidosis is a disorder caused by deposits of an abnormal protein (amyloid) in the heart tissue. These deposits make it hard for the heart to work properly. Causes 
 
 Amyloidosis  is a group of diseases in which clumps of proteins called amyloids build up in body tissues. Over time, these proteins replace normal tissue, leading to failure of the involved organ. There are many forms of amyloidosis. Cardiac amyloidosis ("stiff heart syndrome") occurs when amyloid deposits take the place of normal heart muscle. It is the most typical type of  restrictive cardiomyopathy . Cardiac amyloidosis may affect the way electrical signals move through the heart (conduction system). This can lead to abnormal heartbeats ( arrhythmias ) and faulty heart signals (heart block). The condition can be inherited. This is called familial cardiac amyloidosis. It can also develop as the result of another disease such as a type of bone and blood cancer, or as the result of another medical problem causing inflammation. Cardiac amyloidosis is more common in men than in women. The disease is rare in people under age 40. Symptoms 
 
 Some people may have no symptoms. When present, symptoms may include: 
   Excessive urination at night
    
   Fatigue, reduced exercise ability 
   Palpitations (sensation of feeling heartbeat) 
   Shortness of breath with activity 
   Swelling of the abdomen, legs, ankles, or other part of the body 
   Trouble breathing while lying down
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The signs of cardiac amyloidosis can be related to a number of different conditions. This can make the problem hard to diagnose. Signs may include: Abnormal sounds in the lung (lung crackles) or a heart murmur Blood pressure that is low or drops when you stand up Enlarged neck veins Swollen liver  The following tests may be done: Chest or abdomen CT scan  (considered the "gold standard" to help diagnose this condition) Coronary angiography Electrocardiogram (ECG) Echocardiogram Magnetic resonance imaging  (MRI) Nuclear heart scans  (MUGA, RNV)  Positron emission tomography (PET) An ECG may show problems with the heartbeat or heart signals. It may also show low signals (called “low voltage”). A  cardiac biopsy  is used to confirm the diagnosis. A biopsy of another area, such as the abdomen, kidney, or bone marrow, is often done as well. Treatment 
 
 Your health care provider may tell you to make changes to your diet, including limiting salt and fluids.  You may need to take water pills (diuretics) to help your body get rid of excess fluid. The provider may tell you to weigh yourself every day. A weight gain of 3 or more pounds (1 kilogram or more) over 1 to 2 days can mean there is too much fluid in the body. Medicines including digoxin, calcium-channel blockers, and beta-blockers may be used in people with atrial fibrillation. However, the drugs must be used with caution, and the dosage must be carefully monitored. People with cardiac amyloidosis may be extra sensitive to side effects of these drugs. Other treatments may include: Chemotherapy Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD) Pacemaker, if there are problems with heart signals Prednisone, an anti-inflammatory medicine A  heart transplant  may be considered for people with some types of amyloidosis who have very poor heart function. People with hereditary amyloidosis may need a liver transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In the past, cardiac amyloidosis was thought to be an untreatable and rapidly fatal disease. However, the field is changing rapidly. Different types of amyloidosis can affect the heart in different ways. Some types are more severe than others. Many people can now expect to survive and experience a good quality of life for several years after diagnosis. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Atrial fibrillation  or ventricular arrhythmias Congestive heart failure Fluid buildup in the abdomen ( ascites ) Increased sensitivity to digoxin  Low blood pressure and dizziness from excessive urination (due to medicine)  Sick sinus syndrome Symptomatic  cardiac conduction system disease (arrhythmias related to abnormal conduction of impulses through the heart muscle) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have this disorder and develop new symptoms such as:  Dizziness  when you change position Excessive weight (fluid) gain Excessive weight loss Fainting  spells Severe breathing problems  Alternative Names 
 
 Amyloidosis - cardiac; Primary cardiac amyloidosis - AL type; Secondary cardiac amyloidosis - AA type; Stiff heart syndrome; Senile amyloidosis Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Dilated cardiomyopathy 
 Biopsy catheter 
 References 
 
 McKenna W, Elliott P. Diseases of the myocardium and endocardium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 60. Warnes CA. Pregnancy and heart disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy 
 Sick sinus syndrome 
 Symptomatic 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Amyloidosis 
 Heart Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia