
 Cardiac tamponade 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cardiac tamponade is pressure on the heart that occurs when blood or fluid builds up in the space between the heart muscle and the outer covering sac of the heart. Causes 
 
 In this condition, blood or fluid collects in the sac surrounding the heart. This prevents the heart ventricles from expanding fully. The excess pressure from the fluid prevents the heart from working properly. As a result, the body does not get enough blood. Cardiac tamponade can occur due to: Dissecting aortic aneurysm  (thoracic) End-stage lung cancer Heart attack ( acute MI ) Heart surgery Pericarditis  caused by bacterial or viral infections Wounds to the heart  Other possible causes include: Heart tumors Underactive thyroid gland Kidney failure Leukemia Placement of central lines Radiation therapy to the chest Recent invasive heart procedures Systemic lupus erythematosus Dematomyositis Heart failure Cardiac tamponade due to disease occurs in about 2 out of 10,000 people. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Anxiety , restlessness Sharp  chest pain  that is felt in the neck, shoulder, back, or abdomen Chest pain that gets worse with deep breathing or coughing Problems breathing Discomfort, sometimes relieved by sitting upright or leaning forward Fainting , lightheadedness Pale, gray, or blue skin Palpitations Rapid breathing Swelling of the legs or abdomen Jaundice Other symptoms that may occur with this disorder: Dizziness Drowsiness Weak or absent pulse  Exams and Tests 
 
 Echocardiogram  is the test of choice to help make the diagnosis. This test may be done at the bedside in emergency cases.  A physical exam may show: Blood pressure that falls when breathing deeply Rapid breathing Heart rate over 100 (normal is 60 to 100 beats per minute) Heart sounds are only faintly heard through a stethoscope Neck veins that may be bulging (distended) but the blood pressure is low Weak or absent  peripheral  pulses  Other tests may include: Chest CT  or  MRI of chest Chest x-ray Coronary angiography ECG Right heart catheterization  Treatment 
 
 Cardiac tamponade is an emergency condition that needs to be treated in the hospital. The fluid around the heart must be drained as quickly as possible.  A procedure that uses a needle to remove fluid  from the tissue that surrounds the heart will be done. A surgical procedure to cut and remove part of the covering of the heart (pericardium) may also be done. This is known as surgical pericardiectomy or pericardial window. Fluids are given to keep blood pressure normal until the fluid can be drained from around the heart. Medicines that increase blood pressure may also help keep the person alive until the fluid is drained. Oxygen may be given to help reduce the workload on the heart by decreasing tissue demands for blood flow. The cause of tamponade must be found and treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Death due to cardiac tamponade can occur quickly if the fluid or blood is not removed promptly from the pericardium. The outcome is often good if the condition is treated promptly. However, tamponade may come back. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Heart failure Pulmonary edema Bleeding Shock Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if symptoms develop. Cardiac tamponade is an emergency condition that needs immediate medical attention. Prevention 
 
 Many cases can't be prevented. Knowing your personal risk factors may help you get early diagnosis and treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Tamponade; Pericardial tamponade; Pericarditis - tamponade Images 
 
 
 Heart, front view 
 Pericardium 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 References 
 
 LeWinter MM, Hopkins WE. Pericardial diseases. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 71. Little WC, Oh JK. Pericardial diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 77. Mallemat HA, Tewelde SZ. Pericardiocentesis. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Aortic dissection 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Pericarditis 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Radiation therapy 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 5/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pericardial Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia