
 Castor oil overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Castor oil is a yellowish liquid often used as a lubricant and in laxatives. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing a large amount (overdose) of castor oil. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Large amounts of castor oil can be poisonous. Where Found 
 
 Castor oil comes from the seeds of the castor oil plant. It can be found in these products: Castor oil Alphamul Emulsoil Fleet Flavored Castor Oil Laxopol Unisol  Other products may also contain castor oil. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a castor oil overdose include: Abdominal cramps Chest pain Diarrhea Dizziness Hallucinations (rare) Fainting Nausea Shortness of breath Skin rash Throat tightness  Home Care 
 
 Castor oil is not considered very toxic, but allergic reactions are possible. Call poison control for treatment information. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicine to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Normally, castor oil should cause few problems. Recovery is very likely. If nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are not controlled, serious dehydration and electrolyte (body chemical and mineral) imbalances may occur. These can cause heart rhythm disturbances. Alternative Names 
 
 Alphamul overdose; Emulsoil overdose; Laxopol overdose; Unisol overdose References 
 
 Thomas SHL, White J. Poisoning. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, et al., eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 9. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia