
 Cedar leaf oil poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cedar leaf oil is made from some types of cedar trees. Cedar leaf oil poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance. Young children who smell the oil may try to drink it because it has a sweet smell. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substance in cedar leaf oil that can be harmful is thujone (a hydrocarbon). Where Found 
 
 Cedar leaf oil is used in: Some furniture polishes Some homeopathic medicines Thuja oil Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of cedar leaf oil poisoning in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Breathing difficulty Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns of the food pipe (esophagus) Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly  NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma  (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) Seizures Stupor (decreased level of consciousness)  SKIN Burn Irritation  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the oil is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the oil, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through the vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much cedar leaf oil they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.  Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, or stomach. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection. References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64.  Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia