
 Celiac disease - nutritional considerations 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Celiac disease is an immune disorder passed down through families. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, rye, or sometimes oats. It may also be found in some medicines. When a person with  celiac disease  eats or drinks anything containing gluten, the immune system responds by damaging the lining of the intestinal tract. This affects the body's ability to absorb nutrients. Carefully following a gluten-free diet helps prevent symptoms of the disease. Food Sources 
 
 To follow a gluten-free diet means, you need to avoid all foods, drinks, and medicines made with gluten. This means not eating anything made with barley, rye, and wheat. All items made with all-purpose, white, or wheat flour are prohibited.  FOODS YOU CAN EAT  Beans Cereals made without wheat or barley malt Corn Fruits and vegetables Meat, poultry, and fish (not breaded or made with regular gravies) Milk-based items Gluten-free oats Potatoes Rice Obvious sources of gluten include: Breaded foods Breads, bagels, croissants, buns Cakes, donuts, and pies Cereals (most) Crackers and many snacks bought at the store, such as potato chips and tortilla chips Gravy Pancakes and waffles Pasta and pizza Soups (most) Stuffing  Less obvious foods that must be eliminated include: Beer Candies (some) Cold cuts, hot dogs, salami or sausage Communion breads Croutons Marinades, sauces, soy and teriyaki sauces Salad dressings (some) Self-basting turkey  There is a risk for cross-contamination. Items that are naturally gluten-free may become contaminated if they are made on the same production line, or moved together in the same place, as foods containing gluten. Eating at restaurants, work, school, and social gatherings can be challenging. Call ahead and plan. Due to the widespread use of wheat and barley in foods, it is important to read labels before buying food or eating. Despite its challenges, maintaining a healthy, balanced diet is possible with education and planning. Recommendations 
 
 Talk to a registered dietitian who specializes in celiac disease and the gluten-free diet to help you plan your diet. You may also want to join a  local support group . These groups can help people with celiac disease share practical advice on ingredients, baking, and ways to cope with this life-altering, lifelong disease. Your doctor might have you take multivitamin and mineral or individual nutrient supplement to correct or prevent a deficiency. Alternative Names 
 
 Gluten-free diet; Gluten sensitive enteropathy - diet; Celiac sprue - diet Images 
 
 
 Celiac sprue - foods to avoid 
 References 
 
 Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, et al. American College of Gastroenterology Guideline: diagnosis and management of celiac disease.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2013;108:656-676. PMID: 23609613  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23609613 . Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Celiac Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia