
 Cervicitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cervicitis is swelling or inflamed tissue of the end of the uterus ( cervix ). Causes 
 
 Cervicitis is most often caused by an infection that is caught during sexual activity. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that can cause cervicitis include: Chlamydia Gonorrhea Herpes virus ( genital herpes ) Human papilloma virus ( genital warts ) Trichomoniasis Other things that can cause cervicitis include: A device inserted into the pelvic area such as a cervical cap, diaphragm, or pessary Allergy to spermicides used for birth control  Allergy to latex in condoms Exposure to a chemical Cervicitis is very common. It affects more than one half of all women at some point during their adult life. Risks include: High-risk sexual behavior History of STIs Many sexual partners Sex (intercourse) at an early age Sexual partners who have engaged in high-risk sexual behavior or have had an STI  Bacteria (such as staphylococcus and streptococcus) and too much growth of normal bacteria in the vagina (bacterial vaginosis) can also cause cervicitis. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abnormal vaginal bleeding  that occurs after intercourse, after  menopause , or between periods Unusual  vaginal discharge  that does not go away: discharge may be gray, white or yellow in color Painful sexual intercourse Pain in the vagina Pressure or heaviness in the pelvis Note: There may be no symptoms. Women who may be at risk for chlamydia should be tested for this infection, even if they do not have symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 A pelvic exam is done to look for: Discharge from the cervix Redness of the cervix Swelling (inflammation) of the walls of the vagina  Tests that may be done include: Inspection  of the discharge under a microscope (may show  candidiasis ,  trichomoniasis , or bacterial vaginosis) Pap test Tests for gonorrhea or chlamydia  Rarely,  colposcopy and biopsy of the cervix  is necessary. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to treat chlamydia or gonorrhea. Drugs called antivirals may be used to treat herpes infections. Hormonal therapy (with estrogen or progesterone) may be used in women who have reached menopause. When these treatments have not worked or when cervicitis has been present for a long time, treatment may include: Cryosurgery (freezing) A small probe with an electric current running through it is used to burn or destroy the tissue Laser therapy Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, simple cervicitis usually heals with treatment if the cause is found and there is a treatment for that cause. Possible Complications 
 
 Cervicitis may last for months to years. Cervicitis may lead to pain with intercourse (dyspareunia). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of cervicitis. Prevention 
 
 Things you can do to reduce your risk of developing cervicitis include: Avoid  irritants  such as douches and deodorant tampons. Make sure that any foreign objects you insert into your vagina (such as tampons) are properly placed. Be sure to follow instructions on how long to leave it inside, how often to change it, or how often to clean it. Make sure your partner is free of any STI. You and your partner should not have sex with any other people. Use a  condom  every time you have sex to lower your risk of getting an STI. Condoms are available for both men and women, but are most commonly worn by the man. A condom must be used properly every time. Alternative Names 
 
 Cervical inflammation; Inflammation - cervix Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Cervicitis 
 Uterus 
 References 
 
 Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower genital tract. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Swygard H, Cohen MS. Approach to the patient with a sexually transmitted infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 285. Workowski KA, Bolan GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Birth control and family planning 
 Cervix 
 Chlamydia 
 Genital herpes 
 Genital warts 
 Pap test 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cervix Disorders 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia