
 Chagas disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chagas disease is an illness spread by insects. It is common in South and Central America. Causes 
 
 Chagas disease is caused by the parasite  Trypanosoma cruzi.  It is spread by the bite of reduviid bugs and is one of the major health problems in South America. Due to immigration, the disease also affects people in the United States. Risk factors for Chagas disease include: Living in a hut where reduviid bugs live in the walls Living in Central or South America Poverty Receiving a blood transfusion from a person who carries the parasite but does not have active Chagas disease  Symptoms 
 
 Chagas disease has 2 phases:  acute  and  chronic . The acute phase may have no symptoms or very mild symptoms, including: Fever General ill feeling Swelling of an eye if the bite is near the eye Swollen red area at site of the insect bite  After the acute phase, the disease goes into remission. No other symptoms may appear for many years. When symptoms finally develop, they may include: Constipation Digestive problems Heart failure Pain in the abdomen Pounding or raging heart Swallowing difficulties  Exams and Tests 
 
 Physical examination  can confirm the symptoms. Signs of Chagas disease may include: Disease of the heart muscle Enlarged liver and spleen Enlarged lymph nodes Irregular heartbeat Rapid heartbeat  Tests include: Blood culture  to look for signs of infection Chest x-ray Echocardiogram  (uses sound waves to create pictures of the heart) Electrocardiogram ( ECG , tests electrical activity in the heart) Enzyme-linked immunoassay ( ELISA ) to look for signs of infection Peripheral  blood smear to look for signs of infection  Treatment 
 
 The acute phase and reactivated Chagas disease should be treated. Infants born with the infection should also be treated. Treating the chronic phase is recommended for children and most adults. Adults with chronic Chagas disease should talk to their health care provider to decide whether treatment is needed. Two drugs are used to treat this infection: benznidazole and nifurtimox. Both drugs often have side effects. The side effects may be worse in older people. They may include: Headaches and dizziness Loss of appetite and weight loss Nerve damage Problems sleeping Skin rashes  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 About one third of infected people who are not treated will develop chronic or  symptomatic  Chagas disease. It may take more than 20 years from the time of the original infection to develop heart or digestive problems. Abnormal heart rhythms may cause sudden death. Once heart failure develops, death usually occurs within several years. Possible Complications 
 
 Chagas disease can cause these complications: Enlarged colon Enlarged esophagus with swallowing difficulty Heart disease Heart failure Malnutrition When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you think you may have Chagas disease. Prevention 
 
 Insect control with insecticides and houses that are less likely to have high insect populations will help control the spread of the disease. Blood banks in Central and South America screen donors for exposure to the parasite. The blood is discarded if the donor has the parasite. Most blood banks in the United States began screening for Chagas disease in 2007. Alternative Names 
 
 American trypanosomiasis Images 
 
 
 Kissing bug 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Kirchhoff LV. Chagas' disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 355. Kirchhoff LV.  Trypanosoma  species (American trypanosomiasis, Chagas' disease): Biology of trypanosomes. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 278. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Chronic 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Malaise 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chagas Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia