
 Chancroid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chancroid is a bacterial infection that is spread through sexual contact. Causes 
 
 Chancroid is caused by a bacteria called  Haemophilus ducreyi . The infection is found in many parts of the world, such as Africa and southwest Asia. Very few people are diagnosed in the United States each year with this infection. Most people in the United States who are diagnosed with chancroid have traveled outside the country to areas where the infection is more common. Symptoms 
 
 Within 1 day to 2 weeks after becoming infected, a person will get a small bump on the genitals. The bump becomes an  ulcer  within a day after it first appears. The ulcer: Ranges in size from 1/8 inch to 2 inches (3 millimeters to 5 centimeters) in diameter Is painful Is soft Has sharply defined borders Has a base that is covered with a gray or yellowish-gray material Has a base that bleeds easily if it is banged or scraped  About half of infected men have only a single ulcer. Women often have 4 or more ulcers. The ulcers appear in specific locations. Common locations in men are: Foreskin Groove behind the head of the penis Shaft of the penis Head of the penis Opening of the penis Scrotum In women, the most common location for ulcers is the outer lips of the vagina (labia majora). "Kissing ulcers" may develop. Kissing ulcers are those that occur on opposite surfaces of the labia. Other areas, such as the inner vagina lips (labia minora), the area between the genitals and the anus (perineal area), and the inner thighs may also be involved. The most common symptoms in women are pain with urination and intercourse. The ulcer may look like the sore of  primary syphilis  (chancre). About half of the people who are infected with a chancroid develop enlarged lymph nodes in the groin. In half of people who have swelling of the groin lymph nodes, the nodes break through the skin and cause draining  abscesses . The  swollen lymph nodes  and abscesses are also called buboes. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider diagnoses chancroid by looking at the ulcer(s), checking for swollen lymph nodes and testing (ruling out) for other sexually-transmitted diseases. There is no blood test for chancroid. Treatment 
 
 The infection is treated with antibiotics including ceftriaxone, and azithromycin. Large lymph node swellings need to be drained, either with a needle or local surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Chancroid can get better on its own. Some people have months of painful ulcers and draining. Antibiotic treatment often clears up the lesions quickly with very little scarring. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include urethral  fistulas  and scars on the foreskin of the  penis  in uncircumcised males. People with chancroid should also be checked for other sexually transmitted infections, including  syphilis ,  HIV , and  genital herpes . In people with HIV, chancroid may take much longer to heal. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if: You have symptoms of chancroid You have had sexual contact with a person who you know has a sexually transmitted infection (STI) You have engaged in high-risk sexual practices Prevention 
 
 Chancroid is spread by sexual contact with an infected person. Avoiding all forms of sexual activity is the only absolute way to prevent a sexually transmitted disease. However,  safer sex behaviors  may reduce your risk. The proper use of condoms, either the  male  or  female  type, greatly decreases the risk of catching a sexually transmitted disease. You need to wear the condom from the beginning to the end of each sexual activity. Alternative Names 
 
 Soft chancre; Ulcus molle; Sexually transmitted disease – chancroid; STD - chancroid; Sexually transmitted infection – chancroid; STI - chancroid Images 
 
 
 Male and female reproductive systems 
 References 
 
 Mookerjee AL, Newell GC. Chancroid. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 40. Murphy TF. Haemophilus species including H. influenzae and H. ducreyi (chancroid). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Mandell GL, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 227. Read More 
 
 Penis 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia