
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is a group of disorders passed down through families that affect the nerves outside the brain and spine. These are called the peripheral nerves. Causes 
 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth is one of the most common nerve-related disorders passed down through families (inherited). Changes to at least 40 genes cause different forms of this disease. The disease leads to damage or destruction to the covering ( myelin  sheath) around nerve fibers. Symptoms 
 
 Nerves that stimulate movement (called the motor nerves) are most severely affected. The nerves in the legs are affected first and most severely. Symptoms usually begin between mid-childhood and early adulthood. They may include: Foot deformity (very high arch to feet) Foot drop (inability to hold foot horizontal) Loss of lower leg muscle, which leads to skinny calves Numbness in the foot or leg "Slapping" gait (feet hit the floor hard when walking) Weakness  of the hips, legs, or feet Later, similar symptoms may appear in the arms and hands. These may include a claw-like hand. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show: Difficulty lifting up the foot and making toe-out movements (foot drop) Lack of stretch reflexes in the legs Loss of muscle control and atrophy (shrinking of the muscles) in the foot or leg Thickened nerve bundles under the skin of the legs  Nerve conduction tests are often done to identify different forms of the disorder. A nerve biopsy may confirm the diagnosis. Genetic testing is also available for most forms of the disease. Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure. Orthopedic surgery or equipment (such as braces or orthopedic shoes) may make it easier to walk. Physical and occupational therapy may help maintain muscle strength and improve independent functioning. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease slowly gets worse. Some parts of the body may become numb, and pain can range from mild to severe. Eventually the disease may cause disability. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Progressive inability to walk
    Progressive weakness
    Injury to areas of the body that have decreased sensation When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if there is ongoing weakness or decreased sensation in the feet or legs. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling and testing is advised if there is a strong family history of the disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Progressive neuropathic (peroneal) muscular atrophy; Hereditary peroneal nerve dysfunction; Neuropathy - peroneal (hereditary); Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Katirji B, Koontz D. Disorders of the peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 76. Sarnat HB. Hereditary motor-sensory neuropathies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 613. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Autosomal recessive 
 Muscle atrophy 
 Myelin 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Sex-linked recessive 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia