
 Chemical burn or reaction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chemicals that touch skin can lead to a reaction on the skin, throughout the body, or both. Considerations 
 
 Chemical exposure is not always obvious. You should suspect chemical exposure if an otherwise healthy person becomes ill for no apparent reason, particularly if an empty chemical container is found nearby. Exposure to chemicals at work over a long period of time can cause changing symptoms as the chemical builds up in the person's body. If the person has a chemical in the eyes, see first aid for  eye emergencies .  If the person has swallowed or inhaled a dangerous chemical, call a local poison control at 1-800-222-1222. Symptoms 
 
 Depending on the type of exposure, the symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Breathing difficulty Bright red or  bluish skin  and lips Convulsions  (seizures) Dizziness Eye pain, burning or watering Headache Hives ,  itching ,  swelling , or  weakness  resulting from an  allergic reaction Irritability Nausea  and/or  vomiting Pain where the skin has come in contact with the toxic substance Rash ,  blisters ,  burns  on the skin Unconsciousness  or other states of altered level of consciousness First Aid 
 
 Make sure the cause of the burn has been removed. Try not to come in contact with it yourself. If the chemical is dry, brush off any excess. Avoid brushing it into your eyes. Remove any contaminated clothing or jewelry. Flush the chemicals off the skin surface using cool running water for 15 minutes or more. Treat the person for  shock  if he or she appears faint, pale, or if there is shallow, rapid breathing. Apply cool, wet compresses to relieve pain. Wrap the burned area with a dry sterile dressing (if possible) or clean cloth. Protect the burned area from pressure and friction. Minor chemical burns will generally heal without further treatment. However, if there is a second or  third degree burn  or if there is an overall body reaction, get medical help right away. In severe cases, don't leave the person alone and watch carefully for reactions affecting the entire body. Note: If a chemical gets into the eyes, the eyes should be flushed with water right away. Continue to flush the eyes with running water for at least 15 minutes. Get medical help right away. DO NOT 
 
 DO NOT apply any household remedy such as ointment or salve to a chemical burn. DO NOT become contaminated by the chemical as you give first aid. DO NOT disturb a  blister  or remove dead skin from a chemical burn. DO NOT try to neutralize any chemical without consulting the Poison Control Center or a doctor. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for medical help right away if the person is having  difficulty breathing , is having  seizures , or is  unconscious . Prevention 
 
 All chemicals should be stored out of the reach of young children -- preferably in a locked cabinet. Avoid mixing different products that contain toxic chemicals such as  ammonia  and bleach. The mixture can give off hazardous fumes. Avoid prolonged (even low-level) exposure to chemicals. Avoid using potentially toxic substances in the kitchen or around food. Buy potentially poisonous substance in safety containers, and buy only as much as needed. Many household products are made of toxic chemicals. It is important to read and follow label instructions, including any precautions. Never store household products in food or drink containers. Leave them in their original containers with the labels intact. Safely store chemicals immediately after use. Use paints, petroleum products, ammonia, bleach, and other products that give off fumes only in a well-ventilated area. Alternative Names 
 
 Burn from chemicals  Images 
 
 
 Burns 
 First aid kit 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 
Harchelroad FP, Rottinghaus DM. Chemical burns. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 200. Levine MD, Zane R. Chemical injuries In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 64.  Read More 
 
 Eye emergencies 
 Substance use 
 
 Review Date 1/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Burns 
 Browse the Encyclopedia