
 Cherry angioma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A cherry angioma is a noncancerous (benign) skin growth made up of blood vessels. Causes 
 
 Cherry angiomas are fairly common skin growths that vary in size. They can occur almost anywhere on the body, but usually develop on the trunk. They are most common after age 30. The cause is unknown, but they tend to be inherited (genetic). Symptoms 
 
  A cherry angioma is: Bright cherry-red Small -- pinhead size to about one quarter inch (0.5 centimeter) in diameter Smooth, or can stick out from the skin  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at the growth on your skin to diagnose a cherry angioma. No further tests are usually necessary. Sometimes a  skin biopsy  may be used to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 Cherry angiomas usually do not need to be treated. If they affect your appearance or bleed often, they may be removed by: Burning (electrosurgery/cautery) Freezing ( cryotherapy ) Laser Shave excision Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Cherry angiomas are noncancerous. They usually do not harm your health. Removal usually does not cause scarring. Possible Complications 
 
 A cherry angioma may cause: Bleeding if it is injured Changes in appearance Emotional distress  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of a cherry angioma and you would like to have it removed The appearance of a cherry angioma (or any skin lesion) changes Alternative Names 
 
 Angioma - cherry; Senile angioma; Campbell de Morgan spots; de Morgan spots Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 23. Patterson JW. Vascular tumors. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Birthmarks 
 Browse the Encyclopedia