
 Chiggers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chiggers are tiny, 6-legged wingless organisms (larvae) that mature to become a type of mite. Chiggers are found in tall grass and weeds. Their bite causes severe itching. Causes 
 
 Chiggers are found in certain outdoor areas, such as:  Berry patches Tall grass and weeds Edges of woodlands  Chiggers bite humans around the waist, ankles, or in warm skin folds. Bites commonly occur in the summer and fall months. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptoms of chigger bites are: Severe  itching Red pimple-like bumps or  hives Itching usually occurs several hours after the chiggers attach to the skin. The bite is painless. A  skin rash  may appear on the parts of the body that were exposed to the sun. It may stop where the underwear meets the legs. This is often a clue that the rash is due to chigger bites. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can diagnose chiggers by examining the rash. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to stop the itching. Antihistamines and corticosteroid creams or lotions may be helpful. Antibiotics are not necessary unless you also have another skin infection. Possible Complications 
 
 A  secondary infection  may occur from scratching. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if the rash itches very badly, or if your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment. Prevention 
 
 Avoid outdoor areas that you know are contaminated with chiggers. Applying bug spray containing DEET to skin and clothing can help prevent chigger bites.  Alternative Names 
 
 Harvest mite; Red mite Images 
 
 
 Chigger bite - close-up of blisters 
 References 
 
 Diaz JH. Mites, including chiggers. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 297. Elston DM. Arthropods and leeches. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 367. Read More 
 
 Secondary infections 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia