
 Chlordiazepoxide overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlordiazepoxide is a prescription medicine used to treat certain anxiety disorders and symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Chlordiazepoxide overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Chlordiazepoxide can be poisonous in high amounts. Where Found 
 
 Chlordiazepoxide is found in medicines with these names: A-Poxide Equibral Librax Librium Limbitrol Mitran Other medicines may also contain chlordiazepoxide. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of a chlordiazepoxide overdose in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Difficulty breathing Shallow breathing BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Difficulty urinating EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Double vision  or blurred vision Rapid side-to-side movement of the eyes HEART AND BLOOD Irregular heartbeat Low blood pressure Rapid heartbeat NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma Confusion Depression Dizziness Drowsiness Low body temperature Memory loss Seizures Stupor Tremor Uncoordinated movements Weakness SKIN Bluish-colored lips and fingernails Rash Yellow skin STOMACH AND INTESTINES Abdominal pain Nausea Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the medicine, and strength, if known When it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, a tube through the mouth into the throat, and a breathing machine Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced brain imaging) EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous (IV) fluids through a vein Laxatives Medicines to reverse the effects of the drug and treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (gastric lavage) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With proper care, full recovery is likely. But people with aplastic anemia (suppression of red blood cell production by the bone marrow) or those who overdose on many different substances may not recover fully. Alternative Names 
 
 Librium overdose References 
 
 Gussow L, Carolson A. Sedative hypnotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 165. Rhee JW, Young TP. Sedative-hypnotic agents. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine.  2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 155. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia