
 Chlorinated lime poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlorinated lime is a white powder used for bleaching or disinfecting. Chlorinated lime poisoning occurs when someone swallows chlorinated lime. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Ingredients include: 
Calcium hydroxide
   
Calcium hypochlorite
   Where Found 
 
 This poison can be found in: Bleach Used in a number of manufacturing processes  Note: This list may not include all sources of chlorinated lime. Symptoms 
 
 Chlorinated lime poisoning can cause symptoms in many parts of the body. BLOOD Severe change in the acid level in the blood (pH balance), which leads to damage in all of the body organs  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue  GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM Blood in the stool Burns and possible holes in the throat (esophagus) Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood HEART AND CIRCULATORY SYSTEM Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in the chlorinated lime) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty)  SKIN Burns Holes (necrosis) in the skin or tissues underneath Irritation  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do not make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. Do not give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move them to fresh air. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (and ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray EKG (heart tracing) Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach Fluids through a vein (by IV) Pain medicine Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Washing of the skin (irrigation) -- perhaps every few hours for several days Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. This type of poison can cause severe burns inside the entire gastrointestinal tract. References 
 
 Levine MD, Zane R. Chemical injuries. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia