
 Chlorpromazine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chlorpromazine is a prescription medicine used to treat psychotic disorders. It may also be used to prevent nausea and vomiting, and for other reasons. This medicine may also change the metabolism and the effect of other drugs. Chlorpromazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Chlorpromazine can be poisonous in large amounts. Where Found 
 
 Chlorpromazine is found in these medicines: Thorazine Largactil  Other medicines may also contain chlorpromazine. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of a chlorpromazine overdose in different parts of the body.  
 
 AIRWAYS AND LUNGS No breathing Rapid breathing Shallow breathing   
 
 BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Cannot urinate Weak urine stream  
 
 EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Blurred vision Difficulty swallowing Drooling Dry mouth Sores on the gums, tongue, or in the throat Stuffy nose Yellow eyes   
 
 HEART AND BLOOD High or very low blood pressure Rapid, irregular heartbeat   
 MUSCLES, BONES AND JOINTS 
  Muscle spasms Stiff muscles in the neck or back   
 
 NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma Confusion Convulsions Drowsiness Fainting Fever Hallucinations (rare) Irritability Low body temperature Tremor Uncoordinated movements Weakness   
 REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM Change in female menstrual pattern   
 SKIN
  Bluish skin color Rash   
 STOMACH AND INTESTINES
  Constipation Loss of appetite Nausea  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition The name of the medicine and strength, if known When it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced brain imaging) EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Laxative Medicine to reverse the effects of the drug Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery depends on the amount of damage. Survival past 2 days is usually a good sign. If there are nervous system symptoms, they may be lifelong. The most serious side effects are usually due to damage to the heart. If heart damage can be stabilized, recovery is likely.  References 
 
 Velez LI, Feng S-Y. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150. Wittler MA, Lavonas EJ. Antipsychotics. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 161. 
 Review Date 7/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia