
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a rare cancerous (malignant) growth in one of the ducts that carries  bile  from the liver to the small intestine. Causes 
 
 Bile duct cancers are slow-growing. They don't spread (metastasize) quickly. The exact cause of CCA isn't known. However, many of these tumors are already quite advanced by the time they are found. CCA may start anywhere along the bile ducts. These tumors block off the bile ducts. Both men and women are affected. Most people are older than 65. People with the following health problems may have a higher chance of developing CCA: 
  Bile duct (choledochal)  cysts 
  Chronic  biliary  and liver inflammation
   
  History of infection with parasitic worms, liver flukes
   
  Primary  sclerosing cholangitis Ulcerative colitis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of CCA may include any of the following: Fever  and chills Clay-colored stools and dark urine Itching Loss of appetite Pain in the upper right abdomen that may radiate to the back Weight loss Yellowing of the skin ( jaundice )  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests will be done to check for a tumor or blockage in the bile duct. These may include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound X-ray of the bile ducts ( PTCA ) Procedure that uses a viewing scope to look at the bile ducts ( ERCP ), during which  tissue may be taken  and looked at under a microscope Blood tests that may be done include: Liver function tests  (especially alkaline phosphatase or  bilirubin  levels) Complete blood count (CBC) Treatment 
 
 The goal is to treat the  cancer  and the blockage it causes. When possible, surgery to remove the tumor is the treatment of choice and may result in a cure. If the tumor is large, the entire liver may need to be removed and a  liver transplant  will be needed. Often the cancer has already spread locally or to another area of the body by the time it is diagnosed. As a result, surgery to cure the cancer is not possible. Chemotherapy  or radiation may be given after surgery to decrease the risk of the cancer returning. But the benefit of this treatment is not certain. Endoscopic  therapy with stent placement can temporarily relieve blockages in the biliary ducts. This may also relieve jaundice when the tumor cannot be removed. Laser therapy combined with light-activated chemotherapy medicines is another treatment option for blocked bile duct. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group  with members who share common experiences and problems. Hospice is often a good resource for people with CCA that cannot be cured. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Completely removing the tumor allows some people to survive with the possibility of complete cure. If the tumor cannot be completely removed, a cure is generally not possible. With treatment, about one half of affected people live a year, and about one half live longer, but rarely beyond 5 years. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of CCA include: Infection Liver failure Spread ( metastasis ) of tumor to other organs When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have jaundice or other symptoms of cholangiocarcinoma. Alternative Names 
 
 Bile duct cancer Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Blechacz B, Gores GJ. Tumors of the bile ducts, gallbladder, and ampulla. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 69. National Cancer Institute. PDQ bile duct cancer treatment. Updated December 9, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/types/liver/hp/bile-duct-treatment-pdq . Accessed July 8, 2016. Zani S, Pappas TN. Management of cholangiocarcinoma. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:414-419. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Chronic 
 Cyst 
 Metastasis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia