
 Cholangitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholangitis is an infection of the bile ducts, the tubes that carry  bile  from the liver to the gallbladder and intestines. Bile is a liquid made by the liver that helps digest food. Causes 
 
 Cholangitis is most often caused by bacteria. This can occur when the duct is blocked by something, such as a gallstone or tumor. The infection causing this condition may also spread to the liver. Risk factors include a previous history of  gallstones , sclerosing cholangitis, HIV, narrowing of the common bile duct, and rarely, travel to countries where you might catch a worm or parasite infection. Symptoms 
 
 The following symptoms may occur: Pain  on the upper right side or upper middle part of the abdomen. It may also be felt in the back or below the right shoulder blade. The pain may come and go and feel sharp, cramp-like, or dull. Fever and chills. Dark urine and clay-colored stools. Nausea and vomiting. Yellowing of the skin (jaundice), which may come and go. Exams and Tests 
 
 You may have the following tests to look for blockages: Abdominal ultrasound Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram  (PTCA)  You may also have the following blood tests:  Bilirubin  level Liver enzyme levels Liver function tests White blood count  (WBC)  Treatment 
 
 Quick diagnosis and treatment are very important. Antibiotics to cure infection are the first treatment done in most cases. ERCP or other surgical procedure is done when the person is stable. People who are very ill or are quickly getting worse may need surgery right away. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is very often good with treatment, but poor without it. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Sepsis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of cholangitis. Prevention 
 
 Treatment of gallstones, tumors, and infestations of parasites may reduce the risk for some people. A metal or plastic  stent  that is placed in the bile system may be needed to prevent the infection from returning. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Perman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2012:chap 23. Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and liver. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Gallstones 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bile Duct Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia