
 Cholera 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholera is an infection of the small intestine that causes a large amount of watery diarrhea. Causes 
 
 Cholera is caused by the bacterium  Vibrio cholerae . These bacteria release a toxin that causes an increased amount of water to be released from cells that line the intestines. This increase in water produces severe diarrhea. People get the infection from eating or drinking food or water that contains the cholera germ. Living in or traveling to areas where cholera is present raises the risk of getting it. Cholera occurs in places with a lack of water treatment or sewage treatment, or crowding, war, and famine. Common locations for cholera include: Africa Some parts of Asia India Bangladesh Mexico South and Central America  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of cholera can be mild to severe. They include: Abdominal cramps Dry mucous membranes or dry mouth Dry skin Excessive thirst Glassy or sunken eyes Lack of tears Lethargy Low urine output Nausea Rapid  dehydration Rapid pulse  (heart rate) Sunken "soft spots" (fontanelles) in infants Unusual  sleepiness  or tiredness Vomiting Watery diarrhea that starts suddenly and has a "fishy" odor Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include:  Blood culture Stool culture  and Gram stain  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to replace fluid and salts that are lost through diarrhea. Diarrhea and fluid loss can be fast and extreme. It can be hard to replace lost fluids.  Depending on your condition, you may be given fluids by mouth or through a vein ( intravenous , or IV). Antibiotics may shorten the time you feel ill.  The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed packets of salts that are mixed with clean water to help restore fluids. These are cheaper and easier to use than the typical IV fluid. These packets are now being used around the world. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Severe dehydration can cause death. Most people will make a full recovery when they are given enough fluids. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Severe dehydration Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop severe watery diarrhea. Also call if you have signs of dehydration, including:  Dry mouth Dry skin "Glassy" eyes No tears Rapid pulse Reduced or no urine Sunken eyes Thirst Unusual sleepiness or tiredness  Prevention 
 
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention does not recommend cholera vaccines for most travelers. (This vaccine is not available in the United States.) Travelers should always be careful when eating food and drinking water, even if they are vaccinated. When outbreaks of cholera occur, efforts should be made to establish clean water, food, and sanitation. Vaccination is not very effective in managing outbreaks. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis and bacterial food poisoning. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 140. United Nations World Health Organization. WHO position paper on oral rehydration salts to reduce mortality from cholera. WHO 2016.   www.who.int/cholera/technical/en/ . Accessed March 18, 2016. 
 Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Dehydration 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Endemic 
 Poisoning - fish and shellfish 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cholera 
 Browse the Encyclopedia