
 Choledocholithiasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Choledocholithiasis is the presence of at least one gallstone in the common bile duct. The stone may be made up of  bile  pigments or calcium and cholesterol salts. Causes 
 
 About 1 in 7 people with gallstones will develop stones in the common bile duct. This is the small tube that carries bile from the gallbladder to the intestine. Risk factors include a history of  gallstones . However, choledocholithiasis can occur in people who have had their gallbladder removed. Symptoms 
 
 Often, there are no symptoms unless the stone blocks the common bile duct. Symptoms may include: Pain in the right upper or middle upper abdomen for at least 30 minutes. The pain may be constant or cramping. It can feel sharp or dull.  Fever Yellowing of skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)  Loss of appetite Nausea  and  vomiting Clay-colored stools Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that show the location of stones in the bile duct include the following: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography  (ERCP) Endoscopic ultrasound Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram (PTCA) Your health care provider may order the following blood tests: Bilirubin Complete blood count  (CBC) Liver function tests Pancreatic  enzymes Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve the blockage. Treatment may involve: Surgery to remove the gallbladder and stones ERCP  and a procedure called a sphincterotomy, which makes a surgical cut into the muscle in the common bile duct to allow stones to pass or be removed Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Blockage and infection caused by stones in the biliary tract can be life-threatening. Most of the time, the outcome is good if the problem is detected and treated early.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Biliary  cirrhosis Cholangitis Pancreatitis  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop abdominal pain, with or without fever, and there is no known cause. You develop jaundice. You have other symptoms of choledocholithiasis.  Alternative Names 
 
 Gallstone in the bile duct; Bile duct stone Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Kidney cyst with gallstones, CT scan 
 Choledocholithiasis 
 Gallbladder 
 Gallbladder 
 Bile pathway 
 References 
 
 Fogel EL, Sherman S. Diseases of the gallbladder and bile ducts. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 155. Jackson PG, Evans SRT. Biliary system. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.  18th ed. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders; 2012:chap 55. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 Biliary system 
 Cholangitis 
 Cirrhosis 
 Gallstones 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallstones 
 Browse the Encyclopedia