
 Cholinesterase - blood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Serum cholinesterase is a blood test that looks at levels of 2 substances that help the nervous system work properly. They are called acetylcholinesterase and pseudocholinesterase. Your nerves need these substances to send signals. Acetylcholinesterase is found in nerve tissue and red blood cells. Pseudocholinesterase is found primarily in the liver. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special steps are needed to prepare for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your health care provider may order this test if you may have been exposed to chemicals called organophosphates, which are used in pesticides. This test can help determine your risk of poisoning.  Less often, this test may be done: To diagnose  liver disease Before you receive anesthesia with succinylcholine, which may be given before certain procedures or treatments, including electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) Normal Results 
 
 Typically, normal pseudocholinesterase values range between 8 to 18 units per milliliter (U/mL) or 8 to 18 kilounits per liter (kU/L). Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased pseudocholinesterase levels may be due to: Acute  infection Chronic  malnutrition Heart attack Liver damage Metastasis Obstructive jaundice Poisoning from organophosphates (chemicals found in some pesticides) Inflammation that accompanies some diseases Smaller decreases may be due to: Pregnancy Use of birth control pills  Alternative Names 
 
 Acetylcholinesterase; RBC (or erythrocyte) cholinesterase; Pseudocholinesterase; Plasma cholinesterase; Butyrylcholinesterase; Serum cholinesterase Images 
 
 
 Cholinestrase test 
 References 
 
 Aminoff MJ, So YT. Effects of toxins and physical agents on the nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 58. Nelson LS, Ford MD. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Chronic 
 Heart attack 
 Liver disease 
 Metastasis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN) Gainesville, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pesticides 
 Browse the Encyclopedia