
 Chronic subdural hematoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A chronic subdural hematoma is an "old" collection of blood and blood breakdown products between the surface of the brain and its outermost covering (the dura). The chronic phase of a  subdural hematoma  begins several weeks after the first bleeding. Causes 
 
 A subdural hematoma develops when bridging veins tear and leak blood. These are the tiny veins that run between the dura and surface of the brain. This is usually the result of a head injury. A collection of blood then forms over the surface of the brain. In a  chronic  subdural collection, blood leaks from the veins slowly over time, or a fast hemorrhage is left to clear up on its own. A subdural hematoma is more common in older adults because of normal brain shrinkage that occurs with aging. This shrinkage stretches and weakens the bridging veins. These veins are more likely to break in older adults, even after a minor head injury. You or your family may not remember any injury that could explain it.  Risks include: Long-term heavy alcohol use Long-term use of aspirin, anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, or blood thinning (anticoagulant) medicine such as warfarin Diseases that lead to reduced blood clotting Head injury Old age Symptoms 
 
 In some cases, there may be no symptoms. However, depending on the size of the hematoma and where it presses on the brain, any of the following symptoms may occur:  Confusion or coma Decreased memory Problem speaking or swallowing Trouble walking Drowsiness Headache Seizures Weakness or numbness of arms, legs, face  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will ask about your medical history. The physical exam will carefully check your brain and nervous system for problems with: Balance Coordination Mental functions Sensation Strength Walking  If there is any suspicion of a hematoma, an imaging test, such as a  CT  or  MRI  scan will be done. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control symptoms and reduce or prevent permanent damage to the brain. Medicines may be used to control or prevent seizures. Surgery may be needed. This may include drilling small holes in the skull to relieve pressure and allow blood and fluids to be drained. Large hematomas or solid  blood clots  may need to be removed through a larger opening in the skull ( craniotomy ). Hematomas that do not cause symptoms may not require treatment. Chronic subdural hematomas often come back after being drained. Therefore, it is sometimes better to leave them alone unless they are causing symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Chronic subdural hematomas that cause symptoms usually do not heal on their own over time. They often require surgery, especially when there are neurologic problems, seizures, or chronic headaches. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Permanent brain damage Persistent symptoms, such as  anxiety , confusion, difficulty paying attention,  dizziness ,  headache , and memory loss Seizures  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if you or a family member has symptoms of chronic subdural hematoma. For example, if you see symptoms of confusion, weakness, or numbness weeks or months after a head injury in an older adult, call the provider right away. Take the person to the emergency room or call 911 if the person: Has  convulsions  (seizures) Is not alert ( loses consciousness ) Prevention 
 
 Avoid head injuries by using seat belts, bicycle and motorcycle helmets, and hard hats when appropriate. Alternative Names 
 
 Subdural hemorrhage - chronic; Subdural hematoma - chronic; Subdural hygroma References 
 
 Heegaard WG, Biros MH. Head injury. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 41. Stippler M. Craniocerebral trauma. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Dizziness 
 Headache 
 Seizures 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia