
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic thyroiditis is caused by a reaction of the immune system against the thyroid gland. It often results in reduced thyroid function ( hypothyroidism ). The disorder is also called Hashimoto disease. The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle. Causes 
 
 Hashimoto disease is a common thyroid gland disorder. It can occur at any age, but is most often seen in middle-aged women. It is caused by a  reaction of the immune system  against the thyroid gland. The disease begins slowly. It may take months or even years for the condition to be detected and for thyroid hormone levels to become lower than normal. Hashimoto disease is most common in people with a family history of thyroid disease. In very rare cases, the disease may be related to other hormone problems caused by the immune system. It can occur with poor adrenal function and type 1 diabetes. In these cases, the condition is called type 2 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome (PGA II). Sometimes, Hashimoto disease occurs as part of a condition called type 1 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome (PGA I), along with: Poor function of the adrenal glands Fungal infections of the mouth and nails Underactive parathyroid gland Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Hashimoto disease may include any of the following: Constipation Difficulty concentrating or thinking Dry skin Enlarged neck or presence of  goiter , which may be the only early symptom Fatigue Hair loss Heavy and irregular periods Intolerance to cold Mild weight gain Small or shrunken thyroid gland (late in the disease)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Laboratory tests to determine thyroid function include: Free  T4 test Serum TSH T3 Thyroid autoantibodies Imaging studies and fine needle biopsy are generally not needed to diagnose Hashimoto thyroiditis. This disease may also change the results of the following tests: 
  Complete blood count
    Serum prolactin Serum sodium Total cholesterol  Treatment 
 
 If you have findings of an underactive thyroid, you may receive thyroid replacement medicine. Not everyone with thyroiditis or goiter has low levels of thyroid hormone. You may just need regular follow-up by a health care provider. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease stays stable for years. If it does slowly progress to thyroid hormone deficiency (hypothyroidism), it can be treated with thyroid replacement therapy. Possible Complications 
 
 This condition can occur with other autoimmune disorders. In rare cases, thyroid cancer or thyroid lymphoma may develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of chronic thyroiditis. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent this disorder. Being aware of risk factors may allow earlier diagnosis and treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Hashimoto thyroiditis; Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis; Autoimmune thyroiditis; Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis; Lymphadenoid goiter - Hashimoto; Hypothyroidism - Hashimoto; Type 2 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome - Hashimoto; PGA II - Hashimoto Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 Hashimoto's disease (chronic thyroiditis) 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Amino N, Lazarus JH, De Groot LJ. Chronic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 86. Brent GA, Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism and thyroiditis. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 13. Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Thyroid Association Taskforce on Hypothyroidism in Adults. Clinical practice guidelines for hypothyroidism in adults: cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association.  Endocr Pract . 2012;18(6):988-1028. PMID: 23246686  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23246686 . Read More 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Thyroid nodule 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Browse the Encyclopedia