
 Chronic motor tic disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic motor tic disorder is a condition that involves quick, uncontrollable movements or vocal outbursts (but not both). Causes 
 
 Chronic motor tic disorder is more common than  Tourette syndrome . Chronic tics may be forms of Tourette syndrome. Tics usually start at age 5 or 6 and get worse until age 12. They often improve during adulthood. Symptoms 
 
 A tic is a sudden, fast, repeated movement or sound that has no reason or goal. Tics can involve: Excessive blinking Grimaces of the face Quick movements of the arms, legs, or other areas Sounds (grunts, throat clearing, contractions of the abdomen or diaphragm)  Some people have many kinds of tics. People with the condition can hold off these symptoms for a short time. But they feel relief when they carry out these movements. They often describe the tics as a response to an inner urge. Some say they have abnormal sensations in the area of the tic before it occurs. Tics may continue during all stages of sleep. They may get worse with: 
   Excitement
    
   Fatigue
    Heat 
   Stress
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor can usually diagnose a tic during a physical examination. Tests are generally not needed. People are diagnosed with the disorder when: They have had the tics nearly every day for more than a year They have not had a tic-free period longer than 3 months Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on how severe the tics are and how the condition affects you. Medicines and talk therapy (coginitive behavioral therapy) are used when the tics greatly affect daily activities, such as school and job performance. Medicines can help control or reduce tics. But they have side effects, such as movement and thinking problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Children who develop this disorder between ages 6 and 8 often do very well. Symptoms may last 4 to 6 years, and then stop in the early teens without treatment. When the disorder begins in older children and continues into the 20s, it may become a lifelong condition. Possible Complications 
 
 There are usually no complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 There is usually no need to see the health care provider for a tic unless it is severe or disrupts daily life. If you cannot tell whether you or your child's movements are a tic or something more serious (such as a  seizure ), call your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic vocal tic disorder; Tic - chronic motor tic disorder Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Ryan CA, Trieu ML, DeMaso DR, Walter HR. Motor disorders and habits. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 139. Singer HS. Tics and Tourette's syndrome. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Ferriero D, eds.  Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Tourette syndrome 
 Transient tic disorder 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Tourette Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia