
 Chylomicronemia syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chylomicronemia syndrome is a disorder in which the body does not break down fats (lipids) correctly. This causes fat particles called chylomicrons to build up in the blood. The disorder is passed down through families.  Causes 
 
 Chylomicronemia syndrome can occur due to a rare genetic disorder in which a protein (enzyme) called lipoprotein lipase (LpL) is broken or missing. LpL is normally found in fat and muscle. It helps break down certain lipids. When LpL is missing or broken, fat particles called chylomicrons build up in the blood. This buildup is called chylomicronemia. Defects in apolipoprotein CII and apolipoprotein AV can cause the syndrome as well. It is more likely to occur when people who are predisposed to have high triglycerides (such as those who have  familial combined hyperlipidemia  or  familial hypertriglyceridemia ) develop diabetes, obesity or are exposed to certain medicines. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may start in infancy and include: Abdominal pain due to pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas). Symptoms of nerve damage, such as loss of feeling in the feet or legs, and memory loss. Yellow deposits of fatty material in the skin called xanthomas. These growths may appear on the back, buttocks, soles of the feet, or knees and elbows. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam and tests may show: Enlarged liver  and spleen Inflammation of the pancreas Fatty deposits under the skin Possibly fatty deposits in the  retina  of the eye  A creamy layer will appear when blood spins in a laboratory machine. This layer is due to chylomicrons in the blood. The  triglyceride level  is extremely high. Treatment 
 
 A fat-free, alcohol-free diet is required. You may need to stop taking certain medicines that can make symptoms worse. Do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your health care provider. Conditions such as dehydration and diabetes can make symptoms worse. If diagnosed, these conditions need to be treated and controlled. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A fat-free diet can reduce symptoms dramatically. Possible Complications 
 
 When untreated, the excess chylomicrons may lead to bouts of pancreatitis. This condition can be very painful and even life threatening. There seems to be no increased risk for atherosclerotic heart disease. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical care right away if you have abdominal pain or other warning signs of pancreatitis. Call your provider if you have a personal or family history of high triglyceride levels. Prevention 
 
 There is no way to prevent someone from inheriting this syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency Images 
 
 
 Hepatomegaly 
 References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Robinson JG. What is the role of advanced lipoprotein analysis in practice?  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(25):2607-2615. PMID: 23257303  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23257303 . Semenkovich CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Read More 
 
 Metabolism 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lipid Metabolism Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia