
 Cirrhosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver and poor liver function. It is the last stage of chronic liver disease. Causes 
 
 Cirrhosis is the end result of chronic liver damage caused by chronic (long-term) liver disease. Common causes of chronic liver disease in the United States are: Hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C  infection Alcohol abuse Less common causes of cirrhosis include: When immune cells mistake the liver's normal cells for harmful invaders and attack them . Bile duct disorders. Some medicines. Liver diseases passed down in families. Buildup of fat in the liver that is NOT caused by drinking too much alcohol  (called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD] and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis [NASH]). It is closely related to being overweight. Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms, or symptoms may come on slowly, depending on how well the liver is working. Often, it is discovered by chance when an x-ray is done for another reason. Early symptoms include:  Fatigue and loss of energy Poor appetite and weight loss Nausea or belly pain Small, red spider-like blood vessels on the skin  As liver function worsens, symptoms may include:  Fluid buildup of the legs (edema) and in the abdomen (ascites) Yellow color in the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes (jaundice) Redness on the palms of the hands In men, impotence, shrinking of the testicles, and breast swelling Easy bruising and abnormal bleeding, most often from  swollen veins in the digestive tract Confusion or problems thinking Pale or clay-colored stools  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to look for: An enlarged liver or spleen Excess breast tissue Swollen abdomen , as a result of too much fluid Reddened palms Red spider-like blood vessels on the skin Small testicles Widened veins in the abdomen wall Yellow eyes or skin (jaundice)  You may have the following tests to measure liver function: Complete blood count Prothrombin time Liver function tests Blood albumin  level  Other tests to check for liver damage include: Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen Endoscopy  to check for abnormal veins in the esophagus or stomach Ultrasound of the abdomen You might need a  liver biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 LIFESTYLE CHANGES Some things you can do to help take care of your liver disease are:  Drink no alcohol. Eat a healthy diet that is  low in salt . Get vaccinated for diseases such as influenza, hepatitis A and B, and pneumococcal pneumonia. Talk to your provider about all medicines you take, including herbs and supplements and over-the-counter medicines.  MEDICINES FROM YOUR DOCTOR Water pills (diuretics) to get rid of fluid build-up Vitamin K or blood products to prevent excess bleeding Medicines for mental confusion Antibiotics for infections  OTHER TREATMENTS Endoscopic treatments for enlarged veins in the throat (bleeding varices) Removal of fluid from the abdomen (paracentesis) Placement of a  transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)  to repair blood flow in the liver  When cirrhosis progresses to end-stage liver disease, a liver transplant may be needed.  Support Groups 
 
 You can often ease the stress of illness by joining a  liver disease support group  whose members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Cirrhosis is caused by scarring of the liver. In most cases, the liver cannot heal or return to normal function once damage is severe. Cirrhosis can lead to serious complications.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding disorders Buildup of fluid in the abdomen (ascites) and infection of the fluid (bacterial peritonitis) Enlarged veins in the esophagus, stomach, or intestines that bleed easily (esophageal varices) Increased pressure in the blood vessels of the liver (portal  hypertension ) Kidney failure ( hepatorenal syndrome ) Liver cancer ( hepatocellular carcinoma ) Mental confusion, change in the level of consciousness, or coma ( hepatic encephalopathy )  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of cirrhosis. Get emergency medical help right away if you have: Abdominal or chest pain Abdominal swelling or ascites that is new or suddenly becomes worse A fever (temperature greater than 101°F or 38.3°C) Diarrhea Confusion or a change in alertness, or it gets worse Rectal bleeding, vomiting blood, or blood in the urine Shortness of breath Vomiting more than once a day Yellowing skin or eyes (jaundice) that is new or gets worse quickly  Prevention 
 
 DO NOT drink alcohol heavily. Talk to your provider if you are  worried about your drinking . Take steps to prevent getting or passing  hepatitis B or C . Alternative Names 
 
 Liver cirrhosis; Chronic liver disease; End-stage liver disease; Liver failure - cirrhosis; Ascites - cirrhosis Images 
 
 
 Clubbing 
 Digestive system organs 
 Digestive system 
 Liver cirrhosis, CT scan 
 References 
 
 Chalasani N, Younossi Z, Lavine JE, et al. The diagnosis and management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: practice Guideline by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, American College of Gastroenterology, and the AmericanGastroenterological Association.  Hepatology . 2012;55(6):2005-2023. PMID: 22488764  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22488764 . Garcia-Tsao G, Lim JK; Members of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center Program. Management and treatment of patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension: recommendations from the Department of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center Program and the National Hepatitis C Program.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2009;104(7):1802-1829. PMID: 19455106  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19455106 . Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Kamath PS, Shah VH. Overview of cirrhosis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 74. Mehta G, Rothstein KD. Health maintenance issues in cirrhosis.  Med Clin North Am . 2009;93(4):901-915. PMID: 19577121  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19577121 . O'Shea RS, Dasarathy S, McCullough AJ. Alcoholic liver disease.  Hepatology . 2010;105(1):14-32. PMID: 19904248  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19904248 . Read More 
 
 Alcoholic liver disease 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Ascites 
 Bleeding disorders 
 Bleeding esophageal varices 
 Hepatorenal syndrome 
 High blood pressure 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Liver disease 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Sepsis 
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cirrhosis - discharge 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia