
 Cleft lip and palate 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cleft lip and palate are birth defects that affect the upper lip and the roof of the mouth. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of cleft lip and palate. Problems with genes passed down from 1 or both parents, drugs, viruses, or other toxins can all cause these birth defects. Cleft lip and palate may occur along with other syndromes or birth defects. A cleft lip and palate can: Affect the appearance of the face Lead to problems with feeding and speech Lead to ear infections  Babies are more likely to be born with a cleft lip and palate if they have a family history of these conditions or other birth defects.  Symptoms 
 
 A child may have 1 or more birth defects. A cleft lip may be just a small notch in the lip. It may also be a complete split in the lip that goes all the way to the base of the nose. A cleft palate can be on 1 or both sides of the roof of the mouth. It may go the full length of the palate. Other symptoms include: Change in nose shape (how much the shape changes varies) Poorly aligned teeth  Problems that may be present because of a cleft lip or palate are: Failure to gain weight Feeding problems Flow of milk through nasal passages during feeding Poor growth Repeated ear infections Speech difficulties  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination of the mouth, nose, and palate confirms a cleft lip or cleft palate. Medical tests may be done to rule out other possible health conditions. Treatment 
 
 Surgery to close the cleft lip is often done when the child is between 6 weeks and 9 months old. Surgery may be needed later in life if the problem has a major effect on the nose area. See also:  Cleft lip and palate repair . A cleft palate is usually closed within the first year of life so that the child's speech develops normally. Sometimes, a prosthetic device is temporarily used to close the palate so the baby can feed and grow until surgery can be done. Continued follow-up may be needed with speech therapists and orthodontists. Support Groups 
 
 For additional resources and information, see  cleft palate support groups . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most babies will heal without problems. How your child will look after healing depends on the severity of their condition. Your child might need another surgery to fix the scar from the surgery wound. Children who had a cleft palate repair may need to see a dentist or orthodontist. Their teeth may need to be corrected as they come in. Hearing problems are common in children with cleft lip or palate. Your child should have a hearing test at an early age, and it should be repeated over time. Your child may still have problems with speech after the surgery. This is caused by muscle problems in the palate. Speech therapy will help your child.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Cleft lip and palate is usually diagnosed at birth. Follow your health care provider's recommendations for follow-up visits. Call your provider if problems develop between visits. Alternative Names 
 
 Cleft palate; Craniofacial defect Images 
 
 
 Infant hard and soft palates 
 Cleft lip repair  - series 
 References 
 
 James JN, Costello BJ, Ruiz RL. Management of cleft lip and palate and cleft orthognathic considerations.  Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Clin . 2014;26(4): 565-572. Tinanoff N. Cleft lip and palate. In: Kliegman, RM, Stanton BF, Behrman RE, St. Geme III JW, Schor NF, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 302. Wang TD, Milczuk HA. Cleft lip and palate. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 187. 2007 Feb;40(1):27-60. Read More 
 
 Cleft lip and palate repair 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Cleft lip and palate repair - discharge  
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cleft Lip and Palate 
 Browse the Encyclopedia