
 Cleidocranial dysostosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cleidocranial dysostosis is a disorder involving the abnormal development of bones in the skull and collar (clavicle) area. The condition is passed down through families (inherited). Causes 
 
 Cleidocranial dysostosis is caused by an abnormal gene. It is passed down through families as an  autosomal dominant  trait. That means you only need to get the abnormal gene from one parent in order for you to inherit the disease. Cleidocranial dysostosis is a congenital condition, which means it is present from before birth. The condition affects girls and boys equally. Symptoms 
 
 People with cleidocranial dysostosis have a jaw and brow area that sticks out. The middle of their nose (nasal bridge) is wide. The collar bones may be missing or abnormally developed. This pushes the shoulders together in front of the body. Primary teeth do not fall out at the expected time. Adult teeth may develop later than normal, and an extra set of adult teeth grow in. This causes the normal teeth to become crooked. The condition does not affect a person's intelligence. Other symptoms can include: Ability to touch shoulders together in front of body Delayed closure of fontanelles ("soft spots") Loose joints Prominent forehead ( frontal bossing ) Short forearms Short fingers  Exams and Tests 
 
 There is often a family history of cleidocranial dysostosis. X-rays are most often taken and may show: Undergrowth of the collarbone
   Undergrowth of the shoulder blade Failure of the area in the front of the pelvis bone to close  Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for the bone problems. An oral surgeon should monitor teeth regularly. An otologist should check for hearing problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The bone symptoms cause few problems in most cases. Appropriate dental care is important. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include dental problems and shoulder dislocations. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a family history of cleidocranial dysostosis and are planning to have a child. Also call if you have a child with similar symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is appropriate if a person with a family or personal history of cleidocranial dysostosis is planning to have children. References 
 
 Herring JA. Skeletal dysplasias. In: Herring JA, ed.  Tachdjian's Pediatric Orthopaedics . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 40. Horton WA, Hecht JT. Disorders involving transcription factors. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 698. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia