
 Clubbing of the fingers or toes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Clubbing is changes in the areas under and around the toenails and fingernails that occur with some disorders. The nails also show changes. Considerations 
 
 Common symptoms of clubbing: The nail beds soften. The nails may seem to "float" instead of being firmly attached. The nails forms a sharper angle with the cuticle. The last part of the finger may appear large or bulging. It may also be warm and red. The nail curves downward so it looks like the round part of an upside-down spoon.  Clubbing can develop quickly, often within weeks. It also can go away quickly when its cause is treated. Causes 
 
 Lung cancer  is the most common cause of clubbing. Clubbing often occurs in heart and lung diseases that reduce the amount of oxygen in the blood. These may include: Heart defects that are present at birth  (congenital) Chronic lung infections that occur in people with  bronchiectasis ,  cystic fibrosis , or lung  abscess Infection of the lining of the heart chambers and heart valves (infectious endocarditis). This can be caused by bacteria, fungi, or other infectious substances Lung disorders in which the deep lung tissues become swollen and then scarred ( interstitial lung disease )  Other causes of clubbing: Celiac disease Cirrhosis  of the liver and other liver diseases Dysentery Graves disease Overactive thyroid gland Other types of cancer, including liver, gastrointestinal,  Hodgkin lymphoma When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you notice clubbing, call your health care provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 A person with clubbing often has symptoms of another condition. Diagnosing that condition is based on: Family history Medical history Physical exam that looks at the lungs and chest  The provider may ask questions such as: Do you have any trouble breathing? Do you have clubbing of the fingers, toes, or both? When did you first notice this? Do you think it is getting worse? Does the skin ever have a blue color? What other symptoms do you have?  The following tests may be done: Arterial blood gas Chest  CT scan Chest x-ray Echocardiogram EKG Pulmonary function tests There is no treatment for the clubbing itself. The cause of clubbing can be treated, however. Alternative Names 
 
 Clubbing Images 
 
 
 Clubbing 
 Clubbed fingers 
 References 
 
 Davis JL, Murray JF. History and physical examinations. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst MD, et al.  Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Finger Injuries and Disorders 
 Toe Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia