
 Cold knife cone biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A cold knife cone biopsy (conization) is surgery to remove a sample of abnormal tissue from the cervix. The cervix is the lower part of the uterus (womb) that opens at the top of the vagina. Abnormal changes in the cells on the surface of the cervix is called  cervical dysplasia . How the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure is done in the hospital. You will be placed under general anesthesia (asleep and pain-free), or you will be given medicines to help you relax and feel sleepy.  You will lie on a table and place your feet in stirrups to position your pelvis for exam. The health care provider will place an instrument (speculum) into your vagina to better see the cervix. A small cone-shaped sample of tissue is removed from the  cervix . It is examined under a microscope for signs of cancer. This biopsy may also be a treatment if the doctor removes all of the diseased tissue. Most of the time, you will be able to go home from the hospital the same day as the procedure.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked to not eat or drink for 6 to 8 hours before the test.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 After the procedure, you may have some cramping or discomfort for about a week. For about 4 to 6 weeks avoid: 
 Douching (douching should never be done)
  
 Sexual intercourse
  
 Using tampons
  For 2 to 3 weeks after the procedure, you may have discharge that is: 
 Bloody
  
 Heavy
  
 Yellow-colored
  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Cold knife cone biopsy is done to detect cervical cancer or early changes that lead to cancer. A cold knife biopsy is done if a test called  colposcopy  cannot find the cause of an abnormal Pap smear. Cold knife cone biopsy may also be used to treat: Moderate to severe types of abnormal cell changes (called CIN II or CIN III) Very early stage  cervical cancer  (stage 0 or IA1)  Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means there are no precancerous or cancerous cells in the cervix. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Most often, abnormal results mean that there are precancerous or cancerous cells in the cervix. These changes are called cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). The changes are divided into 3 groups: CIN I -- mild dysplasia CIN II -- moderate to marked dysplasia CIN III -- severe dysplasia to carcinoma in situ  Abnormal results may also be due to cervical cancer.  Risks 
 
 Risks of cold knife cone biopsy include:  Bleeding Incompetent cervix (which may lead to premature delivery) Infection Scarring of the cervix (which may cause painful periods, premature delivery, and difficulty getting pregnant) Damage to the bladder or rectum Cold knife cone biopsy may also make it hard for your provider to interpret abnormal Pap smear results in the future. Alternative Names 
 
 Cone biopsy; Biopsy - cone; Cervical conization; CKC; Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia - cone biopsy; CIN - cone biopsy; Precancerous changes of the cervix - cone biopsy; Cervical cancer - cone biopsy; Squamous intraepithelial lesion - cone biopsy; LSIL - cone biopsy; HSIL - cone biopsy; Low-grade cone biopsy; High-grade cone biopsy; Carcinoma in situ-cone biopsy; CIS - cone biopsy; ASCUS - cone biopsy; Atypical glandular cells - cone biopsy; AGUS - cone biopsy; Atypical squamous cells - cone biopsy; Pap smear - cone biopsy; HPV - cone biopsy; Human papilloma virus - cone biopsy; Cervix - cone biopsy; Colposcopy - cone biopsy Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Cold cone biopsy 
 Cold cone removal 
 References 
 
 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice bulletin no. 157: cervical cancer screening and prevention.  Obstet Gynecol . 2016;127(1):e1-e20. PMID: 26695583  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26695583 . American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice bulletin no. 140: management of abnormal cervical cancer screening test results and cervical cancer precursors.  Obstet Gynecol . 2013;122(6):1338-1367. PMID: 24264713  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24264713 . Baggish MS. Conization of the cervix. In: Baggish MS, Karram MM, eds.  Atlas of pelvic anatomy and gynecologic surgery . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 46. Noller KL. Intraepithelial neoplasia of the lower genital tract (cervix, vulva): etiology, screening, diagnostic techniques, management. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Cervical cancer 
 Colposcopy - directed biopsy 
 Pap test 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Cervical Cancer 
 Cervix Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia