
 Cold wave lotion poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cold wave lotion is a hair care product used to create permanent waves ("a perm"). Cold wave lotion poisoning occurs from swallowing, breathing in, or touching the lotion. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Thioglycolates are the poisonous ingredients in these lotions. Where Found 
 
 Thioglycolates are found in: Hair perm (permanent) kits Various cold wave lotions Other products may also contain cold wave lotion. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of cold wave lotion poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Mouth irritation Burning and redness of the eyes Possibly serious damage to the cornea of the eyes HEART AND BLOOD Weakness due to low blood sugar LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Shortness of breath NERVOUS SYSTEM Drowsiness Headache Seizures (convulsions) SKIN Bluish-colored lips and fingers Rash  ( red  or blistered skin) STOMACH AND INTESTINES Cramping Diarrhea Stomach pain Vomiting Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, give the person water or milk right away, if a provider tells you to do so. Do NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.  The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Laxative Surgery to remove burned skin Tube with camera down the throat and stomach to look for burns (endoscopy) Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Skin problems will clear up when use of the product is stopped. If the lotion is swallowed, recovery normally occurs if the right treatment is received in time. Most home permanent kits that contain cold wave lotions are watered down to avoid poisoning. However, some hair salons may use stronger forms that need to be diluted before use. Exposure to this stronger cold wave lotion will cause much more damage than the ones used at home. Alternative Names 
 
 Thioglycolate poisoning References 
 
 Caraccio TR, McFee RB. Cosmetics and toilet articles. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 100. Ferri FF. Contact dermatitis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:section I. Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 147. 
 Review Date 10/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia