
 Cold intolerance 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cold intolerance is an abnormal sensitivity to a cold environment or cold temperatures. Considerations 
 
 Cold intolerance can be a symptom of a problem with metabolism. Some people (often very thin women) do not tolerate cold temperatures because they have very little body fat to help keep them warm. Causes 
 
 Some causes of cold intolerance are: Anemia Anorexia nervosa Blood vessel problems, such as  Raynaud phenomenon Chronic severe illness General poor health 
   Underactive thyroid ( hypothyroidism ) Problem with the  hypothalamus  (a part of the brain that controls many body functions, including body temperature)
    Home Care 
 
 Follow the recommended therapy for treating the cause of the problem. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have long-term or extreme intolerance to cold. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take a medical history and perform a  physical examination . Your provider's questions may include the following topics. Time pattern: Have you always been intolerant of cold? Has this developed recently? Has it been getting worse? Do you often feel cold when other people do not complain of being cold? Medical history: What is your diet like? How is your general health? What are your height and weight? What other symptoms do you have? Tests that may be performed include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Serum TSH Thyroid hormone levels If your provider diagnoses cold intolerance, you may want to include the diagnosis in your personal medical record. Alternative Names 
 
 Sensitivity to the cold; Intolerance to cold References 
 
 Kim M, Ladenson PW. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 226. Sawka MN, O'Connor FG. Disorders due to heat and cold. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 109. 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hypothermia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia