
 Coloboma of the iris 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Coloboma of the iris is a hole or defect of the  iris  of the eye. Most colobomas are present since birth (congenital). Considerations 
 
 Coloboma of the iris can look like a second pupil or a black notch at the edge of the pupil. This gives the pupil an irregular shape. It can also appear as a split in the iris from the pupil to the edge of the iris. A small coloboma (especially if it is not attached to the pupil) may allow a second image to focus on the back of the eye. This may cause:  Blurred vision Decreased visual acuity Double vision Ghost image  If it is congenital, the defect may include the  retina ,  choroid , or optic nerve. Most colobomas are diagnosed at birth or shortly afterward.  Causes 
 
 Coloboma can occur due to: Eye surgery Inherited conditions Trauma to the eye Most cases of coloboma have no known cause and are not related to other abnormalities. A small number of people with coloboma have other inherited developmental problems. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: You notice that your child has what appears to be a hole in the iris or an unusual-shaped pupil. Your child's vision becomes blurred or decreased.  In addition to your child, you may also need to see an eye specialist (ophthalmologist).  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take a medical history and do an exam. Since the problem is most often diagnosed in infants, knowing about the family history is very important. The provider will do a detailed eye exam that includes looking into the back of the eye while the eye is dilated. An  MRI  of the brain, eyes, and connecting nerves may be done if other problems are suspected. Alternative Names 
 
 Keyhole pupil; Iris defect Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Cat eye 
 Coloboma of the iris 
 References 
 
 Brodsky MC. Congenital optic disc anomalies. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 9.5. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, et al. Abnormalities of pupil and iris. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 622. Read More 
 
 Iris 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia