
 Colorado tick fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Colorado tick fever is a viral infection spread by the bite of the Rocky Mountain wood tick ( Dermacentor andersoni ). Causes 
 
 This disease is usually seen between March and September. Most cases occur in April, May, and June. Colorado tick fever is seen most often in Colorado, especially in campers. The disease is much less common in the rest of the United States. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Colorado tick fever most often start 3 to 6 days after the tick bite. A sudden fever continues for 3 days, goes away, then comes back 1 to 3 days later for another few days. Other symptoms include: Feeling weak all over and muscle aches Headache behind the eyes Nausea and vomiting Rash (may be light-colored) Sensitivity to light ( photophobia ) Skin pain Sweating  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your signs and symptoms. If the provider suspects you have the disease, you will also be asked about your outdoor activity. Blood tests will usually be ordered. Antibody tests can be done to confirm the infection. Other blood tests may include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Creatine kinase Liver function tests Treatment 
 
 There are no specific treatments for this viral infection. The provider will make sure the tick is fully removed from the skin.  You may be told to take a  pain reliever  if you need it. DO NOT give aspirin to a child who has the disease. Aspirin has been linked with  Reye syndrome  in children. It may also cause other problems in Colorado tick fever. If complications develop, treatment will be aimed at controlling the symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Colorado tick fever usually goes away by itself and is not dangerous. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include:  Aseptic meningitis  Encephalitis Hemorrhagic fever When to Contact a Medeical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child develop symptoms of this disease, if symptoms worsen or do not improve with treatment, or if new symptoms develop. Prevention 
 
 When walking or hiking in tick-infested areas, wear closed shoes, long sleeves, and tuck long pants into socks to protect the legs. Wear light-colored clothing, which shows ticks more easily than darker colors, making them easier to remove. Check yourself and your pets frequently. If you find ticks, remove them immediately by using tweezers, pulling carefully and steadily. Insect repellent may be helpful. Alternative Names 
 
 Mountain tick fever; Mountain fever; American mountain fever Images 
 
 
 Ticks 
 Tick imbedded in the skin 
 Antibodies 
 Deer ticks 
 References 
 
 Meagher KE, Decker CF. Other tick-borne illnesses: tularemia, Colorado tick fever, tick paralysis.  Dis Mon . 2012;58:370-376. PMID: 22608124  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22608124 . Traub SJ, Cummins GA. Tick-borne diseases. In: Auerbach PS.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Encephalitis 
 Fever 
 Incidence 
 Insect bites and stings 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia