
 Colon cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Colon, or colorectal cancer, is cancer that starts in the large intestine (colon) or the rectum (end of the colon). Other types of cancer can affect the colon. These include  lymphoma , carcinoid tumors,  melanoma , and sarcomas. These are rare. In this article, colon cancer refers to colon carcinoma only. Causes 
 
 In the United States, colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes of deaths due to cancer. Early diagnosis can often lead to a complete cure. Almost all colon cancers start in the lining of the colon and rectum. When doctors talk about colorectal cancer, this is usually what they are talking about. There is no single cause of colon cancer. Nearly all colon cancers begin as noncancerous (benign) polyps, which slowly develop into cancer. You have a higher risk for colon cancer if you: Are older than 60 Are African American or of eastern European descent Eat a lot of red or processed meats Have  colorectal polyps Have inflammatory bowel disease ( Crohn disease  or  ulcerative colitis ) Have a family history of colon cancer Have a personal history of breast cancer  Some inherited diseases also increase the risk of developing colon cancer. One of the most common is called familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). What you eat may play a role in getting colon cancer. Colon cancer may be linked to a high-fat, low-fiber diet and to a high intake of red meat. Some studies have found that the risk does not drop if you switch to a high-fiber diet, so this link is not yet clear. Smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol are other risk factors for colorectal cancer. Symptoms 
 
 Many cases of colon cancer have no symptoms. If there are symptoms, the following may indicate colon cancer: Abdominal pain and tenderness  in the lower abdomen
   Blood in the stool Diarrhea , constipation, or other change in bowel habits Narrow stools Weight loss  with no known reason  Exams and Tests 
 
 Through  screening tests, colon cancer  can be detected before symptoms develop. This is when the cancer is most curable. Your doctor will perform a physical exam and press on your belly area. The physical exam rarely shows any problems, although the doctor may feel a lump (mass) in the abdomen. A rectal exam may reveal a mass in people with rectal cancer, but not colon cancer. A  fecal occult blood test (FOBT)  may detect small amounts of blood in the stool. This may suggest colon cancer. A  sigmoidoscopy , or more likely, a  colonoscopy , will be done to evaluate the cause of blood in your stool.  Only a full colonoscopy can see the entire colon. This is the best screening test for colon cancer. Blood tests may be done for those diagnosed with colorectal cancer, including: Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for anemia Liver function tests If you are diagnosed with colorectal cancer, more tests will be done to see if the cancer has spread. This is called staging.  CT  or  MRI  scans of the abdomen, pelvic area, chest, or brain may be used to stage the cancer. Sometimes,  PET  scans are also used. Stages of colon cancer are: Stage 0: Very early cancer on the innermost layer of the intestine Stage I: Cancer is in the inner layers of the colon Stage II: Cancer has spread through the muscle wall of the colon Stage III: Cancer has spread to the lymph nodes Stage IV: Cancer has spread to other organs outside the colon  Blood tests to detect tumor markers, such as  carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)  may help the doctor follow you during and after treatment. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on many things, including the stage of the cancer. Treatments may include: Surgery to remove the tumor Chemotherapy  to kill cancer cells Radiation therapy  to destroy cancerous tissue Targeted therapy  to keep cancer from growing and spreading  SURGERY Stage 0 colon cancer may be treated by removing the tumor. This is often done using colonoscopy. For stages I, II, and III cancer, more extensive surgery is needed to remove the part of the colon that is cancerous. This surgery is called  colon resection (colectomy). CHEMOTHERAPY Almost all people with stage III colon cancer receive chemotherapy after surgery for 6 to 8 months. This is called adjuvant chemotherapy. Even though the tumor was removed, chemotherapy is given to treat any cancer cells that may be left. Chemotherapy is also used to improve symptoms and prolong survival in people with stage IV colon cancer. You may receive just 1 type of medicine or a combination of medicines. RADIATION Radiation therapy  is sometimes used for colon cancer. It is usually used in combination with chemotherapy for people with stage III rectal cancer. For people with stage IV disease that has spread to the liver, treatment directed at the liver can be used. This may include: Burning the cancer (ablation) Delivering chemotherapy or radiation directly into the liver Freezing the cancer (cryotherapy) Surgery TARGETED THERAPY Targeted treatment zeroes in on specific targets (molecules) in cancer cells. These targets play a role in how cancer cells grow and survive. Using these targets, the drug disables the cancer cells so they cannot spread. Targeted therapy may be given as pills or may be injected into a vein. You may have targeted therapy along with surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation treatment. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  colon cancer support group.  Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In many cases, colon cancer is treatable when caught early. How well you do depends on many things, especially the stage of the cancer. When treated at an early stage, many people survive at least 5 years after diagnosis. This is called the 5-year survival rate. If the colon cancer does not come back (recur) within 5 years, it is considered cured. Stages I, II, and III cancers are considered possibly curable. In most cases, stage IV cancer is not considered curable, although there are exceptions. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blockage of the colon, causing  bowel obstruction Cancer returning in the colon Cancer spreading to other organs or tissues ( metastasis ) Development of a second primary colorectal cancer  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Black, tar-like stools
   Blood during a bowel movement
   Change in bowel habits
   Unexplained weight loss
   Prevention 
 
 Colon cancer can almost always be caught by colonoscopy in its earliest and most curable stages. Almost all men and women age 50 and older should have a  colon cancer screening . People at higher risk may need earlier screening. Colon cancer screening can often find polyps before they become cancerous. Removing these polyps may prevent colon cancer. Changing your diet and lifestyle is important. Medical research suggests that low-fat and high-fiber diets may reduce your risk for colon cancer. Some studies have reported that NSAIDs (aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, and celecoxib) may help reduce the risk for colorectal cancer. But these medicines can increase your risk of bleeding and heart problems. Your provider can tell you more about the risks and benefits of the medicines and other ways that help prevent colorectal cancer.  Alternative Names 
 
 Colorectal cancer; Cancer - colon; Rectal cancer; Cancer - rectum; Adenocarcinoma - colon; Colon - adenocarcinoma Images 
 
 
 Barium enema 
 Colonoscopy 
 Digestive system 
 Rectal cancer, x-ray 
 Sigmoid colon cancer, x-ray 
 Spleen metastasis - CT scan 
 Structure of the colon 
 Stages of cancer 
 Colon polyps 
 Colon cancer - Series 
 Colostomy  - Series 
 Large bowel resection  - Series 
 Large intestine (colon) 
 References 
 
 Itzkowitz SH, Potack J. Colonic polyps and polyposis syndromes. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 126. National Cancer Institute: PDQ colon cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Date last modified January 7, 2016. Available at:  www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/hp/colon-treatment-pdq . Accessed January 18, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): Colon cancer. Version 2.2016. Available at:  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/colon.pdf . Accessed January 18, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): Rectal cancer. Version 1.2016. Available at:  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/rectal.pdf . Accessed January 18, 2016. Van Schaeybroeck S, Lawler M, Johnston B, et al. Colorectal cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 77. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Ileostomy 
 Melanoma 
 Metastasis 
 Total proctocolectomy and ileal-anal pouch 
 Total proctocolectomy with ileostomy  
 Ulcerative colitis 
 Virtual colonoscopy 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Abdominal radiation - discharge 
 Bland diet 
 Changing your ostomy pouch 
 Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor 
 Ileostomy and your child 
 Ileostomy and your diet 
 Ileostomy - caring for your stoma 
 Ileostomy - changing your pouch 
 Ileostomy - discharge 
 Ileostomy - what to ask your doctor  
 Large bowel resection - discharge 
 Living with your ileostomy 
 Pelvic radiation - discharge 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Small bowel resection - discharge 
 Total colectomy or proctocolectomy - discharge 
 Types of ileostomy 
 Review Date 12/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colorectal Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia