
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction is damage to the peroneal nerve leading to loss of movement or sensation in the foot and leg. Causes 
 
 The peroneal nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve, which supplies movement and sensation to the lower leg, foot and toes. Common peroneal nerve dysfunction is a type of  peripheral neuropathy  (damage to nerves outside the brain or spinal cord). This condition can affect people of any age. Dysfunction of a single nerve, such as the common peroneal nerve, is called a  mononeuropathy . Mononeuropathy means the nerve damage occurred in one area. Certain body-wide conditions can also cause single nerve injuries. Damage to the nerve disrupts the  myelin  sheath that covers the axon (branch of the nerve cell). The axon can also be injured, which causes more severe symptoms.  Common causes of damage to the peroneal nerve include the following: Trauma or injury to the knee Fracture  of the fibula (a bone of the lower leg) Use of a tight plaster cast (or other long-term constriction) of the lower leg Crossing the legs regularly Regularly wearing high boots Pressure to the knee from positions during deep sleep or  coma Injury during knee surgery or from being placed in an awkward position during anesthesia Common peroneal nerve injury is often seen in people: Who are very thin (for example, from  anorexia nervosa ) Who have certain  autoimmune  conditions, such as  polyarteritis nodosa Who have nerve damage from other medical problems, such as diabetes or alcohol use Who have  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease , an inherited disorder that affects all of the nerves Symptoms 
 
 When the nerve is injured and results in dysfunction, symptoms may include: Decreased sensation , numbness, or tingling in the top of the foot or the outer part of the upper or lower leg Foot that drops (unable to hold the foot up) "Slapping" gait (walking pattern in which each step makes a slapping noise) Toes drag while walking Walking problems Weakness  of the ankles or feet Loss of muscle mass because the nerves aren’t stimulating the muscles Exams and Tests 
 
 Examination of the legs may show: Loss of muscle control in the lower legs and feet Atrophy  of the foot or foreleg muscles Difficulty lifting up the foot and toes and making toe-out movements Tests of nerve activity include: Electromyography  (EMG, a test of electrical activity in muscles) Nerve conduction tests MRI Nerve ultrasound  What other tests are done depend on the suspected cause of nerve dysfunction, and the person's symptoms and how they develop. Tests may include blood tests,  x-rays  and scans. Treatment 
 
 Treatment aims to improve mobility and independence. Any illness or other cause of the neuropathy should be treated. Padding the knee may prevent further injury by crossing the legs, while also serving as a reminder to not cross your legs. In some cases, corticosteroids injected into the area may reduce  swelling  and pressure on the nerve. You may need surgery if: The disorder does not go away You have problems with movement There is evidence that the nerve axon is damaged Surgery to relieve pressure on the nerve may reduce symptoms if the disorder is caused by pressure on the nerve. Surgery to remove tumors on the nerve may also help. CONTROLLING SYMPTOMS You may need over-the-counter or prescription pain relievers to control pain. Other medicines that may be used to reduce pain include gabapentin, carbamazepine, or tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline.  If your pain is severe, a pain specialist can help you explore all options for pain relief. Physical therapy exercises may help you maintain muscle strength. Orthopedic devices may improve your ability to walk and prevent  contractures . These may include braces,  splints , orthopedic shoes, or other equipment. Vocational counseling, occupational therapy, or similar programs may help you maximize your mobility and independence. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on the cause of the problem. Successfully treating the cause may relieve the dysfunction, although it may take several months for the nerve to improve. If nerve damage is severe, disability may be permanent. The  nerve pain  may be very uncomfortable. This disorder does NOT usually shorten a person's expected lifespan. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may develop with this condition include: Decreased ability to walk Permanent  decrease in sensation  in the legs or feet Permanent  weakness  or  paralysis  in the legs or feet Side effects of medicines When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of common peroneal nerve dysfunction. Prevention 
 
 Avoid crossing your legs or putting long-term pressure on the back or side of the knee. Treat injuries to the leg or knee right away. If a cast, splint, dressing, or other pressure on the lower leg causes a tight feeling or numbness, call your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - common peroneal nerve; Peroneal nerve injury; Peroneal nerve palsy Images 
 
 
 Common peroneal nerve dysfunction 
 References 
 
 King JC. Peroneal neuropathy. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 75. Peroneal neuropathy. In: Preston DC, Shapiro BE, eds.  Electromyography and Neuromuscular Disorders . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 22. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Anorexia 
 Broken bone 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Muscle function loss 
 Myelin 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Polyarteritis nodosa 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 8/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foot Injuries and Disorders 
 Leg Injuries and Disorders 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia