
 Complement component 3 (C3) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Complement C3 is a blood test that measures the activity of a certain protein that is part of the complement system. The complement system is a group of proteins that move freely through your bloodstream. The proteins work with your immune system and play a role in the development of inflammation. There are nine major complement proteins. They are labeled C1 through C9. This test measures C3. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Blood is drawn from a vein. Most often, a vein from the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand is used. The site is cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). The health care provider wraps an elastic band around the upper arm to apply pressure to the area and make the vein swell with blood. Next, the provider gently inserts a needle into the vein. The blood collects into an airtight vial or tube attached to the needle. The elastic band is removed from your arm. Once the blood has been collected, the needle is removed, and the puncture site is covered to stop any bleeding. In infants or young children, a sharp tool called a lancet may be used to puncture the skin and make it bleed. The blood collects into a small glass tube called a pipette, or onto a slide or test strip. A bandage may be placed over the area if there is any bleeding. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 C3 and C4 are the most commonly measured complement components. A complement test may be used to monitor people with an  autoimmune disorder  and to see if treatment for their condition is working. When the complement system is turned on during inflammation, levels of complement proteins may go down. For example, patients with active  lupus erythematosus  may have lower-than-normal levels of the complement proteins  C3  and  C4 . Complement activity varies throughout the body. For example, in people with  rheumatoid arthritis , complement activity in the blood may be normal or higher-than-normal, but much lower-than-normal in the joint fluid. The test may also be done for the following conditions:  Fungal infections Gram negative  septicemia Parasitic infections, such as  malaria Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) Shock Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is 75 to 135 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 0.07 to 0.14 grams per liter (g/L). Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased complement activity may be seen in: Cancer Ulcerative colitis Decreased complement activity may be seen in: Bacterial infections (especially Neisseria) Cirrhosis Glomerulonephritis Hepatitis Hereditary angioedema Kidney transplant  rejection Lupus nephritis Malnutrition Systemic lupus erythematosus  Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Considerations 
 
 The "complement cascade" is a series of reactions that take place in the blood. The cascade activates the complement proteins. The result is an attack unit that creates holes in the membrane of bacteria, killing them. C3 attaches to and kills bacteria directly. Alternative Names 
 
 C3 Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Sullivan KE, Grumach AS. The complement system. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 6.  Read More 
 
 C1 esterase inhibitor 
 Cirrhosis 
 Complement 
 Complement component 4 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hepatitis 
 Hereditary angioedema 
 Kidney transplant 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Malaria 
 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) 
 Septicemia 
 Shock 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autoimmune Diseases 
 Lupus 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia