
 Confusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Confusion is the inability to think as clearly or quickly as you normally do. You may feel disoriented and have difficulty paying attention, remembering, and making decisions. Considerations 
 
 Confusion may come on quickly or slowly over time, depending on the cause. Many times, confusion lasts for a short time and goes away. Other times, it is permanent and not curable. It may be associated with delirium or dementia. Confusion is more common in the older people and often occurs during a hospital stay. Some confused people may have strange or unusual behavior or may act aggressively. Causes 
 
 Confusion may be caused by different health problems, such as: Alcohol  or drug intoxication Brain tumor Head trauma  or  head injury  ( concussion ) Fever Fluid and electrolyte imbalance Illness in an older person, such as loss of brain function ( dementia )  Illness in a person with existing neurological disease, such as a stroke Infections Lack of sleep (sleep deprivation) Low blood sugar Low levels of oxygen (for example, from chronic lung disorders) Medicines Nutritional deficiencies, especially  niacin ,  thiamine , or  vitamin B12 Seizures Sudden drop in body temperature ( hypothermia ) Home Care 
 
 A good way to find out if someone is confused is to ask the person his or her name, age, and the date. If they are unsure or answer incorrectly, they are confused. If the person does not usually have confusion, call a health care provider. A confused person should not be left alone. For safety, the person may need physical restraints. To help a confused person: Always introduce yourself, no matter how well the person once knew you. Often remind the person of his or her location. Place a calendar and clock near the person. Talk about current events and plans for the day. Try to keep the surroundings calm, quiet, and peaceful. For sudden confusion due to low blood sugar (for example, from diabetes medicine), the person should drink a sweet drink or eat a sweet snack. If the confusion lasts longer than 10 minutes, call the provider. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 if confusion has come on suddenly or there are other symptoms, such as:  Cold or clammy skin Dizziness or feeling faint Fast pulse Fever Headache Slow or rapid breathing Uncontrolled shivering Also call 911 if: Confusion has come on suddenly in someone with diabetes Confusion came on after a head injury The person becomes unconscious at any time If you have been experiencing confusion, call for an appointment with your provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The doctor will do a physical examination and ask questions about the confusion. The doctor will ask questions to learn if the person knows the date, the time, and where he or she is. Questions about recent and ongoing illness, among other questions, will also be asked.  Tests that may ordered include: Blood tests CT scan of the head Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) Mental status tests Neuropsychological tests Urine tests Treatment depends on the cause of the confusion. For example, if an infection is causing the confusion, treating the infection will likely clear the confusion. Alternative Names 
 
 Disorientation; Thinking - unclear; Thoughts - cloudy; Altered mental status - confusion Images 
 
 
 Head trauma 
 References 
 
 Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Mental status. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 5. Huff JS. Confusion. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 17. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Concussion - what to ask your doctor - adult  
 Concussion - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Dementia - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, attending neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia