
 Congenital spherocytic anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Congenital spherocytic anemia is a disorder of the surface layer (membrane) of red blood cells. It leads to red blood cells that are shaped like spheres, and premature breakdown of red blood cells ( hemolytic anemia ). Causes 
 
 This disorder is caused by a defective gene. The defect results in an abnormal red blood cell membrane. The affected cells have a smaller surface area for their volume than normal red blood cells, and can break open easily. Having a family history of spherocytosis increases the risk for this disorder. The  anemia  can vary from mild to severe. In severe cases the disorder may be found in early childhood. In mild cases it may go unnoticed until adulthood. This disorder is most common in people of northern European descent, but it has been found in all races. Symptoms 
 
 Infants may have yellowing of the skin and eyes ( jaundice ) and pale coloring ( pallor ). Other symptoms may include: Fatigue Irritability Shortness of breath Weakness Exams and Tests 
 
 In most cases, the spleen is enlarged. Laboratory tests can help diagnose this condition. Tests may include: Blood smear to show abnormally shaped cells Bilirubin level Complete blood count  to check for anemia Coombs test LDH level Osmotic fragility  or specialized testing to evaluate for the red blood cell defect Reticulocyte count Treatment 
 
 Surgery to remove the spleen ( splenectomy ) cures the anemia but does not correct the abnormal cell shape. Families with a history of spherocytosis should have their children screened for this disorder. Children should wait until age 5 to have splenectomy because of the infection risk. In mild cases discovered in adults, it may not be necessary to remove the spleen. Children and adults should be given a pneumococcal vaccine before spleen removal surgery. They also should receive folic acid supplements. Additional vaccines may be needed based on the person's history. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This outcome is usually good with treatment. After the spleen is removed, the life span of the red blood cell returns to normal. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Gallstones Much lower red blood cell production (aplastic crisis) caused by a viral infection, which can make anemia worse  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your symptoms get worse. Your symptoms do not improve with new treatment. You develop new symptoms. Prevention 
 
 This is an inherited disorder and may not be preventable. Being aware of your risk, such as a family history of the disorder, may help you get diagnosed and treated early. Alternative Names 
 
 Hereditary spherocytosis; Spherocytosis; Hemolytic anemia - spherocytic Images 
 
 
 Red blood cells, normal 
 Red blood cells, spherocytosis 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Gallagher PG. Red blood cell membrane disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 43. Klatt EC, Kumar V. Hematopathology of red blood cells and bleeding disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Gallstones 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia