
 Congenital rubella 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Congenital rubella is a condition that occurs in an infant whose mother is infected with the virus that causes German measles. Congenital means the condition is present at birth. Causes 
 
 Congenital rubella occurs when the rubella virus in the mother affects the developing baby in the first 3 months of pregnancy. After the fourth month, if the mother has a rubella infection, it is less likely to harm the developing baby. The number of babies born with congenital rubella is much smaller since the rubella vaccine was developed. Pregnant women who are not vaccinated for rubella and who have not had the disease in the past risk infecting themselves and their unborn babies. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms in the infant may include: Cloudy corneas or white appearance of pupil Deafness Developmental delay Excessive sleepiness Irritability Low birth weight Below average mental functioning (intellectual disability) Seizures Small head size Skin rash at birth  Exams and Tests 
 
 The baby's health care provider will run blood and urine tests to check for the virus. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for congenital rubella. Symptoms are treated as appropriate. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome for a child with congenital rubella depends on how severe the baby's problems are. Heart defects can often be corrected. Damage to the nervous system is permanent. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may involve many parts of the body, including: Eyes: Clouding of the lens of the eye (cataracts) Damage to the optic nerve (glaucoma) Inflammation of the retina (retinitis) Heart: A blood vessel that usually closes shortly after birth remains open ( patent ductus arteriosus ) Narrowing of the large artery that delivers oxygen-rich blood to the heart (pulmonary artery stenosis) Other heart defects Central nervous system: Intellectual disability Difficulty with physical movement (motor disability) Small head from poor brain development Brain infection (encephalitis) Infection of the spinal column and tissue around the brain (meningitis) Other: Deafness Low blood platelet count Enlarged liver and spleen Abnormal muscle tone Bone disease When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have concerns about congenital rubella You are unsure if you have had the rubella vaccine You or your children need a rubella vaccine Prevention 
 
 Vaccination prior to pregnancy can prevent congenital rubella. Pregnant women who have not had the vaccine should avoid contact with people who have the rubella virus. Images 
 
 
 Rubella on an infant's back 
 Rubella syndrome 
 References 
 
 Gershon AA. Rubella virus (German measles). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 154. Mason WH. Rubella. In: Kliegman, RM, Behrman RE, St Geme JW, Schor NF, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 239. Reef SE. Rubella (German measles). In Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 368. Read More 
 
 Rubella 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rubella 
 Browse the Encyclopedia