
 Congenital afibrinogenemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare, inherited blood disorder in which the blood does not clot normally. It occurs when there is a total lack of a protein called fibrinogen. This protein is needed for the blood to  Causes 
 
 This rare disease is due to an abnormal gene that causes a complete lack of fibrinogen. The gene must be passed down from both parents.  Congenital afibrinogenemia can occur in males or females.  Milder forms can occur in people who inherit only one abnormal gene from their parents. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bruising  easily Bleeding from the umbilical cord just after birth Bleeding in the mucus membranes Bleeding in the brain Bleeding in the joints Heavy bleeding after injury or surgery Nosebleeds that do not stop easily  Exams and Tests 
 
 If your health care provider suspects this problem, you will have lab tests to confirm the type and severity of the disorder. This disorder usually shows up in children, often at birth. Tests include: Bleeding time Fibrinogen levels Partial thromboplastin time ( PTT ) Prothrombin time ( PT ) Reptilase time Thrombin time Treatment 
 
 The following treatments can be used for bleeding episodes or to prepare for surgery: Cryoprecipitate (a blood product containing concentrated fibrinogen and other clotting factors) Fibrinogen (RiaSTAP) Plasma (the liquid portion of the blood containing clotting factors)  People with this condition should get the  hepatitis B vaccine . Having many transfusions raises your risk for getting hepatitis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Excessive bleeding is common with this condition. These episodes may be severe, or even fatal. Bleeding in the brain is a leading cause of death in people with this disorder. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blood clots with treatment Development of antibodies (inhibitors) to fibrinogen with treatment Gastrointestinal bleeding Miscarriage Rupture of the spleen Slow healing of wounds  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or seek emergency care if you have excessive bleeding. Tell your surgeon before you have surgery if you know or suspect you have a bleeding disorder. Prevention 
 
 Congenital afibrinogenemia is an inherited condition. There is no known prevention.  References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 139. Meeks SL. Congenital disorders of fibrinogen. In: Shaz BH, Hillyer CD, Roshal M, Abrams CS, eds.  Transfusion Medicine and Hemostasis: Clinical and Laboratory Aspects . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 108.  Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia