
 Cor pulmonale 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cor pulmonale is a condition that causes the right side of the heart to fail. Long-term high blood pressure in the arteries of the lung and right ventricle of the heart can lead to cor pulmonale. Causes 
 
 High blood pressure  in the arteries of the lungs is called  pulmonary hypertension . It is the most common cause of cor pulmonale. In people who have pulmonary hypertension, changes in the small blood vessels inside the lungs can lead to increased blood pressure in the right side of the heart. This makes it harder for the heart to pump blood to the lungs. If this high pressure continues, it puts a strain on the right side of the heart. That strain can cause cor pulmonale. Lung conditions that cause a low blood oxygen level in the blood over a long time can also lead to cor pulmonale. Some of these are: Autoimmune diseases  that damage the lungs, such as  scleroderma Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD) Chronic blood clots in the lungs Cystic fibrosis  (CF) Scarring of the lung tissue ( interstitial lung disease ) Severe curving of the upper part of the spine ( kyphoscoliosis ) Obstructive sleep apnea , which causes stops in breathing because of airway inflammation Idiopathic (no specific cause) tightening (constriction) of the blood vessels of the lungs Symptoms 
 
 Shortness of breath or lightheadedness during activity is often the first symptom of cor pulmonale. You may also have a fast heartbeat and feel like your heart is pounding. Over time, symptoms occur with lighter activity or even while you are at rest. Symptoms you may have are: Fainting spells during activity Chest discomfort, usually in the front of the chest Chest pain Swelling of the feet or ankles Symptoms of lung disorders, such as wheezing or coughing Bluish lips and fingers (cyanosis) Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. The exam may find: Fluid buildup in your belly Abnormal heart sounds Bluish skin Liver swelling Swelling of the neck veins, which is a sign of high pressure in the right side of the heart Ankle swelling  These tests may help diagnose cor pulmonale: Blood antibody tests Blood test to check for a substance called brain natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest , with or without an injection of a contrast fluid (dye) Echocardiogram ECG Lung biopsy  (rarely done) Measurement of blood oxygen by checking arterial blood gas ( ABG ) Pulmonary (lung) function tests Right heart catheterization Ventilation and perfusion scan of the lungs  (V/Q scan) Tests for autoimmune lung disease Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control symptoms. It is important to treat medical problems that cause pulmonary hypertension, because they can lead to cor pulmonale. Many treatment options are available. In general, the cause of your cor pulmonale will determine which treatment you receive.  If your provider prescribes medicines, you may take them by mouth (oral), receive them through a vein (intravenous or IV), or breathe them in (inhaled). You will be closely monitored during treatment to watch for side effects and to see how well the medicine works for you. Never stop taking your medicines without first talking to your doctor.  Other treatments may include: Blood thinners to reduce the risk of blood clots Medicines to manage heart failure symptoms Oxygen therapy at home A lung or heart-lung transplant, if medicine does not work  Important tips to follow: Avoid strenuous activities and heavy lifting. Avoid traveling to high altitudes. Get a yearly flu vaccine, as well as other vaccines, such as the pneumonia vaccine. If you smoke, stop. Use oxygen if your doctor prescribes it. Women should not get pregnant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the cause of your cor pulmonale. As your illness gets worse, you will need to make changes to your home so that you can manage as well as possible. You will also need help around your house. Possible Complications 
 
 Cor pulmonale may lead to: Life-threatening shortness of breath Severe fluid buildup in your body Shock Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have shortness of breath or chest pain. Prevention 
 
 Do not smoke. Smoking causes lung disease, which can lead to cor pulmonale. Alternative Names 
 
 Right-sided heart failure; Pulmonary heart disease Images 
 
 
 Sarcoid, stage IV - chest x-ray 
 Acute vs. chronic conditions 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Cor pulmonale. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016.  Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:368-370. McLaughlin VV, Humbert M. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 74. Read More 
 
 Acute mountain sickness 
 Central sleep apnea 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Coal worker's pneumoconiosis 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Interstitial lung disease 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Scoliosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 1/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Failure 
 Pulmonary Hypertension 
 Browse the Encyclopedia