
 Corneal ulcers and infections 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The cornea is the clear tissue at the front of the eye. A corneal ulcer is an open sore in the outer layer of the cornea. It is often caused by infection. Causes 
 
 Corneal ulcers are most commonly caused by an infection with bacteria, viruses, fungi, or a parasite. Acanthamoeba keratitis occurs in contact lens users. It is more likely to happen in people who make their own homemade cleaning solutions. Fungal keratitis can occur after a corneal injury involving plant material. It may also occur in people with a suppressed immune system. Herpes simplex keratitis is a serious viral infection. It may cause repeated attacks that are triggered by stress, exposure to sunlight, or any condition that lowers the immune response.  Corneal ulcers or infections may also be caused by: Eyelids that do not close all the way, such as with  Bell palsy Foreign bodies in the eye Scratches (abrasions) on the eye surface Severely dry eyes Severe allergic eye disease Various inflammatory disorders  Wearing contact lenses, such as soft contacts that are left in overnight, may cause a corneal ulcer. Watch this video about: Corneal injury Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of infection or ulcers of the cornea include: Blurry or hazy vision Eye that appears red or bloodshot Itching and discharge Sensitivity to light  (photophobia) Very painful and  watery eyes White patch on the cornea  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do the following tests: Exam of scrapings from the ulcer Fluorescein stain of the cornea Keratometry (measuring the curve of the cornea) Pupillary reflex response Refraction test Slit-lamp examination Tests for dry eye Visual acuity Blood tests to check for inflammatory disorders may also be needed. Treatment 
 
 Treatment for corneal ulcers and infections depends on the cause. Treatment should be started as soon as possible to prevent scarring of the cornea. If the exact cause is not known, you may be given antibiotic drops that work against many kinds of bacteria. Once the exact cause is known, you may be given drops that treat bacteria, herpes, other viruses, or a fungus. Severe ulcers sometimes require a corneal transplant. Corticosteroid eye drops may be used to reduce swelling and inflammation in certain conditions. Your provider may also recommend that you: Avoid eye makeup DO NOT wear contact lenses at all, or do not wear them at night Take pain medicines Wear protective glasses  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many people recover completely and have only a minor change in vision. However, a corneal ulcer or infection can cause long-term damage and affect vision. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated corneal ulcers and infections may lead to: Loss of the eye (rare) Severe vision loss Scars on the cornea When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of corneal ulcers or an infection. You have been diagnosed with this condition and your symptoms become worse after treatment. Your vision is affected. You develop eye pain that is severe or becoming worse. Your eyelids or the skin around your eyes becomes swollen or red. You have a headache in addition to your other symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Things you can do to prevent the condition include: Wash your hands well when handling your contact lenses. Avoid wearing contact lenses overnight. Get prompt treatment for an eye infection to prevent ulcers from forming.  Alternative Names 
 
 Bacterial keratitis; Fungal keratitis; Acanthamoeba keratitis; Herpes simplex keratitis Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Groos EB Jr, Chang BH. Complications of contact lenses. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4; chap 27. Keenan JD, McLeod SD. Bacterial keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.12.  Keenan JD, McLeod SD. Fungal keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.13.  Lin A, Bouchard CS. Noninfectious keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.17.  Soukiasian SH. Peripheral ulcerative keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.16.  Tuli SS, Kubal AA. Herpes simplex keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.15. Yanoff M, Cameron JD. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Corneal injury 
 Erosion 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Corneal Disorders 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia