
 Coronary heart disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Coronary heart disease is a narrowing of the small blood vessels that supply blood and oxygen to the heart. Coronary heart disease (CHD) is also called coronary artery disease. Causes 
 
 CHD is the leading cause of death in the United States for men and women. CHD is caused by the buildup of plaque in the arteries to your heart. This may also be called  hardening of the arteries . Fatty material and other substances form a plaque buildup on the walls of your coronary arteries. The coronary arteries bring blood and oxygen to your heart. This buildup causes the arteries to get narrow. As a result, blood flow to the heart can slow down or stop.  A  risk factor for heart disease  is something that increases your chance of getting it. You cannot change some risk factors for heart disease, but you can change others.  Symptoms 
 
 In some cases, symptoms may be very noticeable. But, you can have the disease and not have any symptoms. This is more often true in the early stages of heart disease.  Chest pain or discomfort ( angina ) is the most common symptom. You feel this pain when the heart is not getting enough blood or oxygen. The pain may feel different from person to person. It may feel heavy or like someone is squeezing your heart. You may feel it under your breast bone (sternum). You may also feel it in your neck, arms, stomach, or upper back. The pain most often occurs with activity or emotion. It goes away with rest or a medicine called nitroglycerin. Other symptoms include shortness of breath and fatigue with activity (exertion).  Some people have symptoms other than chest pain, such as: Fatigue Shortness of breath General weakness  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. You will often need more than one test before getting a diagnosis.  Tests may include: Coronary angiography . An invasive test that evaluates the heart arteries under x-ray. Echocardiogram  stress test. Electrocardiogram (ECG) . Electron-beam computed tomography (EBCT) to look for calcium in the lining of the arteries. The more calcium, the higher your chance for CHD. Exercise stress test . Heart CT scan . Nuclear stress test .  Treatment 
 
 You may be asked to take one or more medicines to treat blood pressure, diabetes, or high cholesterol levels. Follow your provider's directions closely to help prevent coronary artery disease from getting worse. Goals for treating these conditions in people who have coronary artery disease: The most commonly used blood pressure target for people with heart disease is below 140/90 mm Hg, but sometimes less than 130/80. If you have diabetes, your  HbA1c  levels will be monitored and brought down to the level your provider recommends. Your LDL cholesterol level will be lowered with statin drugs.  Treatment depends on your symptoms and how severe the disease is. You should know about: Other medicines used to treat angina What to do when you have chest pain Being active when you have heart disease Eating a heart-healthy diet Never stop taking your medicines without first talking to your provider. Stopping heart medicines suddenly can make your angina worse or cause a heart attack. You may be referred to a cardiac rehabilitation program to help improve your heart's fitness. Procedures and surgeries used to treat CHD include: Angioplasty and stent placement , called percutaneous coronary interventions (PCIs) Coronary artery bypass surgery Minimally invasive heart surgery Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Everyone recovers differently. Some people can stay healthy by changing their diet, stopping smoking, and taking their medicines as prescribed. Others may need medical procedures such as angioplasty or surgery. In general, early detection of CHD generally leads to a better outcome. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have any risk factors for CHD, talk to your provider about prevention and possible treatment steps.  Call your provider, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or go to the emergency room right away if you have: Angina or chest pain Shortness of breath Symptoms of a heart attack Alternative Names 
 
 Heart disease, Coronary heart disease, Coronary artery disease; Arteriosclerotic heart disease; CHD; CAD Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Anterior heart arteries 
 Posterior heart arteries 
 Acute MI 
 Cholesterol producers 
 References 
 
 Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  Circulation . 2010;122(25):2748-2764. PMID: 21098427  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21098427 .  Hansson GK, Hamsten A. Atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 70. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 8).  JAMA . 2014;311(5):507-520. PMID: 24352797  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352797 . Morrow DA, Boden WE. Stable ischemic heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 54. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women--2011 update:a guideline from the American Heart Association.  Circulation . 2011;123(11):1243-1262. PMID: 21325087  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21325087 .  Ridker PM, Libby P, Buring JE. Risk markers and the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 42. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension.  Circulation . 2015;131(19):e435-e470. PMID: 25829340  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25829340 .  Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63(25 Pt B):2889-2934. PMID: 24239923  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24239923 . Read More 
 
 Gastric bypass surgery 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Heart attack 
 Heart disease and women 
 Intravascular ultrasound  
 Laparoscopic gastric banding 
 Magnetic resonance angiography 
 Metabolic syndrome 
 Obesity 
 Stable angina 
 Unstable angina 
 Ventricular assist device 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Cholesterol - drug treatment 
 Controlling your high blood pressure 
 Dietary fats explained 
 Fast food tips 
 Gastric bypass surgery - discharge  
 Heart bypass surgery - discharge 
 Heart bypass surgery - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Heart disease - risk factors 
 Heart failure - discharge 
 Heart failure - fluids and diuretics 
 Heart failure - home monitoring 
 Heart pacemaker - discharge 
 How to read food labels 
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator - discharge 
 Laparoscopic gastric banding - discharge  
 Low-salt diet  
 Mediterranean diet 
 Weight-loss surgery - after - what to ask your doctor  
 Weight-loss surgery - before - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 7/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Coronary Artery Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia