
 Cow's milk - infants 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 If your child is under 1 year old, you should not feed your baby cow's milk, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).  Cow's milk does not provide enough: Vitamin E Iron Essential fatty acids  Your baby's system cannot handle the high levels of these nutrients in cow's milk: Protein Sodium Potassium  It is also hard for your baby to digest the protein and fat in cow's milk. To provide the best diet and nutrition for your infant, the AAP recommends: If possible, you should feed your baby  breast milk  for the first 6 months of life. You should give your baby only breast milk or iron-fortified formula during the first 12 months of life, not cow's milk. Starting at age 6 months, you may add solid foods to your baby's diet.  If breastfeeding is not possible,  infant formulas  provide a healthy diet for your infant. Whether you use breast milk or formula, your baby may have colic and be fussy. These are common problems in all babies. Cow's milk formulas usually do not cause these symptoms, so it may not help if you switch to a different formula. If your baby has ongoing colic, talk with your health care provider. References 
 
 American Academy of Pediatrics, Section on Breastfeeding. Breastfeeding and the use of human milk.  Pediatrics . 2012;129: e827-41. PMID: 22371471  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22371471 . Parks EP, Shaikhkhalil A, Groleau V, Wendel D, Stallings VA. Feeding healthy infants, children, and adolescents. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Protein in diet 
 Vitamin E 
 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Nutrition 
 Browse the Encyclopedia