
 Craniotabes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Craniotabes is a softening of the skull bones. Causes 
 
 Craniotabes can be a normal finding in infants, especially premature infants. It may occur in up to one third of all newborn infants. Craniotabes is harmless in the newborn, unless it is associated with other problems. These can include  rickets  and  osteogenesis imperfecta  (brittle bones). Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Soft areas of the skull, especially along the suture line Soft areas pop in and out Bones may feel soft, flexible, and thin along the suture lines  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will press the bone along the area where the bones of the skull come together. The bone often pops in and out, similar to pressing on a Ping-Pong ball if the problem is present. No testing is done unless osteogenesis imperfecta or rickets is suspected. Treatment 
 
 Craniotabes that are not associated with other conditions are not treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Complete healing is expected. Possible Complications 
 
 There are no complications in most cases. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 This problem is most often found when the baby is examined during a  well-baby check . Call your health care provider if you notice that your child has signs of craniotabes (to rule out other problems). Prevention 
 
 Most of the time, craniotabes is not preventable. Exceptions are when the condition associated with rickets and osteogenesis imperfecta. Alternative Names 
 
 Congenital cranial osteoporosis References 
 
 Greenbaum, L. Rickets and Hypervitaminosis D. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Osteogenesis imperfecta 
 Rickets 
 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia