
 Creeping eruption 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Creeping eruption is a human infection with dog or cat  hookworm  larvae (immature worms). Causes 
 
 Hookworm eggs are found in the stool of infected dogs and cats. When the eggs hatch, the larvae can infest soil and vegetation. When you come into contact with this infested soil, the larvae can burrow into your skin. They cause an intense  inflammatory response  that leads to a  rash  and severe itching. Creeping eruption is more common in countries with warm climates. In the United States, the Southeast has the highest rates of infection. The main risk factor for this disease is contact with damp, sandy soil that has been contaminated with infected cat or dog stool. More children than adults are infected. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of creeping eruption include: Blisters Itching , may be more severe at night Raised, snakelike tracks in the skin that may spread over time, usually about 1 cm (less than one half inch) per day, usually on the feet and legs (severe infections may cause several tracks).  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can often diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. In rare cases, a  skin biopsy  is done to rule out other conditions. In very rare cases, a blood test is done to see if you have increased  eosinophils  (a type of white blood cell). Treatment 
 
 Anti-parasitic medicines may be used to treat the infection.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Creeping eruption often goes away by itself over weeks to months. Treatment helps the infection go away more quickly. Possible Complications 
 
 Creeping eruption may lead to these complications: Bacterial skin infections caused by scratching Spread of the infection through the bloodstream to the lungs or small intestine (rare)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your health care provider if you or your child have skin sores that are:  Snakelike Itchy Moving from one area to another.  Prevention 
 
 Public sanitation and deworming of dogs and cats have decreased hookworm infestation in the United States. Hookworm larvae often enter the body through bare feet, so wearing shoes in areas where hookworm infestations are known to occur helps prevent infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Cutaneous larvae migrans; Zoonotic hookworm;  Ancylostoma caninum ;  Ancylostoma braziliensis ;  Bunostomum phlebotomum ;  Uncinaria stenocephala Images 
 
 
 Hookworm - mouth of the organism 
 Hookworm - close-up of the organism 
 Hookworm - Ancylostoma caninum 
 Cutaneous larva migrans 
 References 
 
 Diemert DJ. Intestinal nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 365. Nash TE. Visceral larvae migrans and other uncommon helminth infections. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 292. Read More 
 
 Hookworm infection 
 Immune response 
 Rashes 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia