
 Cri du chat syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cri du chat syndrome is a group of symptoms that result from missing a piece of  chromosome  number 5. The syndrome's name is based on the infant's cry, which is high-pitched and sounds like a cat. Causes 
 
 Cri du chat syndrome is rare. It is caused by a missing piece of chromosome 5. Most cases are believed to occur during the development of the egg or sperm. A small number of cases occur when a parent passes a different, rearranged form of the chromosome to their child. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Cry that is high-pitched and may sound like a cat Downward slant to the eyes 
   Low birth weight and slow growth Low-set or abnormally shaped ears Intellectual disability Partial webbing or fusing of fingers or toes Single line in the palm of the hand Skin tags just in front of the ear Slow or incomplete development of motor skills Small head ( microcephaly ) Small jaw ( micrognathia ) Wide-set eyes Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Inguinal hernia Diastasis recti  (separation of the muscles in the belly area) Low muscle tone Epicanthal folds , an extra fold of skin over the inner corner of the eye Problems with the folding of the outer ears  Genetic tests can show a missing part of chromosome 5. Skull x-ray may reveal any problems with the shape of the base of the skull. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment. Your provider will suggest ways to treat or manage the symptoms. Parents of a child with this syndrome should have genetic counseling and testing to determine if one parent has a change in chromosome 5. Support Groups 
 
 5P- Society --  www.fivepminus.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Intellectual disability is common. Half of children with this syndrome learn enough verbal skills to communicate. The cat-like cry becomes less noticeable over time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the amount of intellectual disability and physical problems. Symptoms may affect the person's ability to care for themselves. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This syndrome is most often diagnosed at birth. Your provider will discuss your baby's symptoms with you. It is important to continue regular visits with the child's providers after leaving the hospital. Genetic counseling and testing is recommended for all people with a family history of this syndrome. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Couples with a family history of this syndrome who wish to become pregnant may consider genetic counseling. Alternative Names 
 
 Chromosome 5p deletion syndrome; 5p minus syndrome; Cat cry syndrome References 
 
 Bacino CA, Lee B. Cytogenetics. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 81. Read More 
 
 Chromosome 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Developmental Disabilities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia