
 Crying - excessive (0 to 6 months) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Infants normally cry about 1 to 3 hours a day. It is perfectly normal for an infant to cry when hungry, thirsty, tired, lonely, or in pain. It is also normal for a baby to have a fussy period in the evening. But, if an infant cries too often, it may be a sign of something that needs treatment. Causes 
 
 Infants may cry because of any of the following: Boredom or loneliness Colic Discomfort or irritation from a wet or dirty diaper, excessive gas, or feeling cold Hunger or thirst Illness Infection (a likely cause if the crying is accompanied by irritability,  lethargy ,  poor appetite , or  fever . You should call your baby's health care provider) Medicines Normal muscle jerks and twitches that disturb the sleep Pain Teething Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on the causes. Follow your provider's advice.  If the infant seems constantly hungry despite short, frequent feedings, talk to your provider about normal growth and feeding times. If crying is due to boredom or loneliness, it may be helpful to touch, hold, and talk to the infant more and place the infant within sight. Place baby-safe toys where the child can see them. If crying is due to sleep disturbance, wrap the baby firmly in a blanket before putting the infant to bed. For excessive crying in infants due to cold, dress the infant warmly or adjust the temperature of the room. If adults are cold, the baby is likely cold also. Always check for possible causes of pain or discomfort in a crying baby. When cloth diapers are used, look for diaper pins that have become loose or loose threads that have become tightly wrapped around fingers or toes. Diaper rashes also can be uncomfortable. Take your baby's temperature to check for fever. Check your baby head-to-toe for any injuries. Pay particular attention to the fingers, toes, and genitalia. It is not uncommon for a hair to get wrapped around part of your baby, such as a toe, creating pain. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the provider if: A baby's excessive crying remains unexplained and does not go away in 1 day, despite attempts at home treatment The baby has other symptoms, such as fever, along with the excessive crying  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine your baby and ask about the child's medical history and symptoms. Questions may include: Is the child teething? Is the child bored, lonely, hungry, thirsty? Does the child seem to have a lot of gas? What other symptoms does the child have? Such as, difficulty waking up, fever, irritability, poor appetite, or vomiting?  The provider will check the infant's growth and development. Antibiotics may be prescribed if the baby has a bacterial infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Excessive crying (infants 0 to 6 months) Images 
 
 
 Crying, excessive (0-6 months) 
 References 
 
 American Academy of Pediatrics. Crying and your baby: how to calm a fussy or colicky baby. Updated 2008. Available at: shop.aap.org/Crying-and-Your-Baby-How-to-Calm-a-Fussy-or-Colicky-Baby-Brochure. Accessed November 20, 2014. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Common Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia