
 Culdocentesis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Culdocentesis is a procedure that checks for abnormal fluid in the space just behind the  vagina . This area is called the cul-de-sac. How the Test is Performed 
 
 First, you will have a pelvic exam. Then, the health care provider will hold the  cervix  with an instrument and lift it slightly. A long, thin needle is inserted through the wall of the vagina (just below the uterus). A sample is taken of any fluid found in the space. The needle is pulled out. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked to walk or sit for a short time before the test is done. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have an uncomfortable, cramping feeling. You will feel a brief, sharp pain as the needle is inserted. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure is rarely done today because a transvaginal ultrasound can show fluid behind the uterus.  It may be done when: You have pain in the lower abdomen and pelvis, and other tests suggest there is fluid in the area. You may have a ruptured  ectopic pregnancy  or  ovarian cyst .  Normal Results 
 
 No fluid in the cul-de-sac, or a very small amount of clear fluid, is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Fluid may still be present, even if not seen with this test. You may need other tests.  A sample of fluid may be taken and tested for infection.  If blood is seen in the area, you may need emergency surgery.  Risks 
 
 Risks include puncturing the uterine or bowel wall. Considerations 
 
 You may need someone to take you home if you were given medicines to relax. Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Culdocentesis 
 Cervix needle sample 
 References 
 
 Braen GR. Culdocentesis In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 57. Eisinger SH. Culdocentesis (colpocentesis). In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 139. Read More 
 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Ovarian cysts 
 Vagina 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Irina Burd, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Gynecology and Obstetrics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ovarian Cysts 
 Pelvic Pain 
 Browse the Encyclopedia