
 Cushing syndrome due to adrenal tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cushing syndrome due to adrenal tumor is a form of Cushing syndrome. It occurs when a tumor of the adrenal gland releases excess amounts of the hormone cortisol. Causes 
 
 Cushing syndrome  is a disorder that occurs when your body has a higher than normal level of the hormone cortisol. This hormone is made in the  adrenal glands . Too much cortisol can be due to various problems. One such problem is a tumor on one of the adrenal glands. Adrenal tumors release cortisol. Adrenal tumors are rare. They can be noncancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant). Noncancerous tumors that can cause Cushing syndrome include: Adrenal adenomas Micronodular  hyperplasia Cancerous tumors that may cause Cushing syndrome include an adrenal carcinoma. 
  Symptoms 
 
 Most people with Cushing syndrome have: Round, red, full face ( moon face ) Slow growth rate in children Weight gain with fat accumulation on the trunk, but fat loss from the arms, legs, and buttocks (central obesity)  Skin changes that are often seen: Skin infections Purple marks (1/2 inch or 1 centimeter or more wide), called  striae , on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, and breasts Thin skin with easy bruising  Muscle and bone changes include: Backache, which occurs with routine activities Bone pain or tenderness Collection of fat between the shoulders and above the collar bone Rib and spine fractures caused by  thinning of the bones Weak muscles, especially of the hips and shoulders  Women often have: Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs Periods that become irregular or stop  Men may have: Decreased or no desire for sex Erection problems Other symptoms that may occur include: 
  Mental changes, such as depression, anxiety, or changes in behavior Fatigue Headache Increased thirst and urination  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Tests to confirm Cushing syndrome: 24-hour urine sample  to measure  cortisol  and  creatinine  levels Blood tests to check ACTH, cortisol, and potassium levels Dexamethasone suppression test Blood cortisol levels Blood DHEA level Saliva cortisol level  Tests to determine cause or complications include: Abdominal CT ACTH Bone mineral density Cholesterol Fasting glucose  Treatment 
 
 Surgery is done to remove the adrenal tumor. Often, the entire adrenal gland is removed. Glucocorticoid replacement treatment is usually needed until the other adrenal gland recovers from surgery. You may need this treatment for 9 to 12 months. If surgery is not possible, such as in cases of adrenal cancer, medicines can be used to stop the release of cortisol.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with an adrenal tumor who have surgery have an excellent outlook. For adrenal cancer, surgery is sometimes not possible. When surgery is performed, it does not always cure the cancer. Possible Complications 
 
 Cancerous adrenal tumors can spread to the liver or lungs. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop any symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Appropriate treatment of adrenal tumors may reduce the risk of complications in some people with tumor-related Cushing syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Adrenal tumor - Cushing syndrome Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Adrenal metastases, CT scan 
 Adrenal Tumor - CT 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Cushing's disease and syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:385-386. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. Treatment of Cushing's syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100:2807-2831. PMID: 26222757  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26222757 . Schneider DF, Mazeh H, Lubner SJ, Jaume JC, Chen H. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 71. Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 ACTH blood test 
 Adrenal glands 
 Cancer 
 Chronic 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome 
 Metastasis 
 Pituitary tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cushing's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia