
 
 
 
 
 Cushing disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
          			Cushing disease is a condition in which the pituitary gland releases too much adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The pituitary gland is an organ of the  endocrine system . Cushing disease is a form of  Cushing syndrome . Other forms of Cushing syndrome include  exogenous Cushing syndrome ,  Cushing syndrome caused by adrenal tumor , and  ectopic Cushing syndrome . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cushing disease is caused by a  tumor  or excess growth ( hyperplasia ) of the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland is located just below the base of the brain. A type of pituitary tumor called an adenoma is the most common cause. An adenoma is almost always benign (not a cancer). With Cushing disease, the pituitary gland releases too much ACTH. ACTH stimulates production and release of cortisol, a stress hormone. Too much ACTH causes the adrenal glands to make too much cortisol. Cortisol is normally released during stressful situations. It controls the body's use of  carbohydrates , fats, and  proteins . It also helps reduce the immune system's response to swelling (inflammation). 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms of Cushing disease include: 
 
 Upper body obesity (above the waist) and thin arms and legs 
 Round, red, full face ( moon face ) 
 Slow growth rate in children  
 
 Skin changes that are often seen include: 
 
 Acne  or skin infections 
 Purple marks (1/2 inch or 1 centimeter or more wide), called  striae , on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, and breasts 
 Thin skin with easy bruising, most commonly on the arms and hands 
 
 Muscle and bone changes include: 
 
 Backache, which occurs with routine activities 
 Bone pain or tenderness 
 Collection of fat between the shoulders ( buffalo hump ) 
 Weakening of the bones, which leads to rib and spine fractures 
 Weak muscles 
 
 Women often have: 
 
 Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs 
 Menstrual cycle that becomes irregular or stops 
 
 Men may have: 
 
 Decreased or no desire for sex (low libido) 
 Impotence 
 
 Other symptoms may include: 
 
 Mental changes , such as depression, anxiety, or changes in behavior 
 Fatigue 
 Headache Increased thirst and urination 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tests are done to confirm there is too much cortisol in the body, then to determine the cause. These tests confirm too much cortisol: 
 
 24-hour  urine cortisol 
 Dexamethasone suppression test  (low dose) 
 Salivary cortisol levels (early morning and late at night) 
 
 These tests determine the cause: 
 
 Blood ACTH level 
 Brain MRI 
 Corticotropin-releasing hormone test, which acts on the pituitary gland to cause the release of ACTH 
 Dexamethasone suppression test (high dose) 
 Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) -- measures ACTH levels in the veins that drain the pituitary gland compared to the veins in the chest 
 
 Other tests that may be done include any of the following: 
 
 Fasting blood glucose  and  A1c  to test for diabetes 
 Lipid and cholesterol testing 
 Bone mineral density scan  to check for osteoporosis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment involves surgery to remove the pituitary tumor, if possible. After surgery, the pituitary gland may slowly start to work again and return to normal. During the recovery process from surgery, you may need cortisol replacement treatments because your normal pituitary needs time to start making ACTH again. Radiation treatment of the pituitary gland may also be used if the tumor is not completely removed. If the tumor does not respond to surgery or radiation, you may need medicines to stop your body from making cortisol. If these treatments are not successful, the adrenal glands may need to be removed to stop the high levels of cortisol from being produced. Removal of the adrenal glands can cause the pituitary tumor to get much bigger (Nelson syndrome). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Untreated, Cushing disease can cause severe illness, even death. Removal of the tumor may lead to full recovery, but the tumor can grow back. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Possible Complications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health problems that may result from Cushing disease include: 
 
 Compression fractures 
 Diabetes 
 High blood pressure 
 Infections 
 Kidney stones 
 Mood or other psychiatric problems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of Cushing disease. If you have had a pituitary tumor removed, call your provider if you have signs of complications, including signs that the tumor has returned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pituitary Cushing disease; ACTH-secreting adenoma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molitch M. Anterior pituitary. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 224. Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Striae in the popliteal fossa 
 Striae on the leg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adrenal Gland Disorders 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Cushing's Syndrome 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Endocrine Diseases 
 Read more       
   
 
