
 Cushing syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cushing syndrome is a disorder that occurs when your body has a high level of the hormone cortisol.  Causes 
 
 The most common cause of Cushing syndrome is taking too much glucocorticosteroid medicine. This form of Cushing syndrome is called  exogenous Cushing syndrome . Prednisone, dexamethasone, and prednisolone are examples of this type of medicine. Glucocorticoids mimic the action of the body's natural hormone cortisol. These drugs are used to treat many conditions such as asthma, skin inflammation, cancer, bowel disease, joint pain, and rheumatoid arthritis. Other people develop Cushing syndrome because their body produces too much cortisol. This hormone is made in the  adrenal glands.  Causes of too much cortisol are: Cushing disease , which occurs when the pituitary gland makes too much of the hormone ACTH. ACTH then signals the adrenal glands to produce too much cortisol. A pituitary gland tumor can cause this condition. Tumor of the adrenal gland Tumor elsewhere in the body that produces corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) Tumors elsewhere in the body that produce  ACTH  ( ectopic Cushing syndrome )  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary. Not everyone with Cushing syndrome has the same symptoms. Some people have many symptoms while others have hardly any symptoms. Most people with Cushing syndrome have: Round, red, full face ( moon face ) Slow growth rate (in children) Weight gain with fat accumulation on the trunk, but fat loss from the arms, legs, and buttocks (central obesity)  Skin changes that are often include: Skin infections Purple marks (1/2 inch or 1 centimeter or more wide) called  striae  on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, and breasts Thin skin with easy bruising  Muscle and bone changes include: Backache, which occurs with routine activities Bone pain or tenderness Collection of fat between the shoulders and above collar bone Rib and spine fractures caused by  thinning of the bones Weak muscles, especially of the hips and shoulders  Women with Cushing syndrome often have: Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs Periods that become irregular or stop  Men may have: Decreased or no desire for sex Erection problems Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: 
 Mental changes, such as depression, anxiety, or changes in behavior Fatigue Headache Increased thirst and urination  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and the medicines you are taking. Tell the provider about all medicines you have been taking for the past several months. Also tell the provider about shots that you received at a provider's office. Laboratory tests that may be done to diagnose Cushing syndrome and identify the cause are: Blood  cortisol levels Blood sugar Saliva cortisol levels Dexamethasone suppression test 24-hour urine for  cortisol  and  creatinine ACTH level ACTH stimulation test  (rarely) Tests to determine the cause or complications may include: Abdominal CT ACTH Pituitary MRI Bone mineral density Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause.  
 Cushing syndrome caused by corticosteroid use: Your doctor will instruct you to slowly decrease the medicine dosage. Stopping the medicine suddenly can be dangerous. If you cannot stop taking the medicine because of disease, your high blood sugar, high cholesterol levels, and bone thinning or  osteoporosis  should be closely monitored.  With Cushing syndrome caused by a pituitary or a tumor that releases ACTH (Cushing disease), you may need: Surgery to remove the tumor. Radiation after removal of a pituitary tumor in some cases. Cortisol replacement therapy after surgery and possibly for the rest of your life.  With Cushing syndrome due to an adrenal tumor or other tumors: You may need surgery to remove the tumor. If the tumor cannot be removed, you may need medicines to help block the release of cortisol.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Removing the tumor may lead to full recovery, but there is a chance that the condition will return. Survival for people with ectopic tumors depends on the tumor type. Untreated, Cushing syndrome can be life threatening. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from Cushing syndrome include any of the following: Diabetes Enlargement of pituitary tumor Fractures  due to osteoporosis High blood pressure Kidney stones Serious infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Prevention 
 
 If you take a corticosteroid, know the signs and symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Getting treated early can help prevent any long-term effects of Cushing syndrome. If you use inhaled steroids, you can decrease your exposure to the steroids by using a spacer and by rinsing your mouth after breathing in the steroids. Alternative Names 
 
 Hypercortisolism; Cortisol excess Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Cushing's disease and syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:385-386. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. Treatment of Cushing's syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100:2807-2831. PMID: 26222757  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26222757 . Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 ACTH blood test 
 Adrenal glands 
 Asthma 
 Broken bone 
 Cushing disease 
 Cushing syndrome due to adrenal tumor 
 Diabetes 
 Ectopic Cushing syndrome 
 Exogenous Cushing syndrome 
 Kidney stones 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cushing's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia