
 Cutaneous skin tag 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A cutaneous skin tag is a common skin growth. Most of the time, it is harmless.  Causes 
 
 A cutaneous tag usually occurs in older adults. They are more common in people who are overweight or who have diabetes. They are thought to occur from skin rubbing against skin. Symptoms 
 
 The tag sticks out of the skin and may have a short, narrow stalk connecting it to the surface of the skin. Some skin tags are as long as a half an inch (1 centimeter). Most skin tags are the same color as skin, or a little darker.  In most cases, a skin tag is painless and does not grow or change. However, it may become irritated from rubbing by clothing or other materials.  Places where skin tags occur include: Neck Underarms Middle of the body, or under folds of skin Eyelids Inner thighs Other body areas  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Sometimes a skin biopsy is done.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment is often not needed. Your provider may recommend treatment if the skin tag is irritating, or you don't like how it looks. Treatment may include:  Surgery to remove it Freezing it (cryotherapy) Burning it off (cauterization)  Tying string or dental floss around it to cut off the blood supply so that it will eventually fall off Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A skin tag is most often harmless ( benign ). It may become irritated if clothing rubs against it. In most cases, the growth usually does not grow back after it is removed. However, new skin tags may form on other parts of the body. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if the skin tag changes, or if you want it removed. Do not cut it yourself, because it can bleed a lot. Alternative Names 
 
 Skin tag; Acrochordon; Fibroepithelial polyp Images 
 
 
 Skin tag 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Benign skin tumors. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 20.  Kamino H, Reddy VB, Pui J. Fibrous and fibrohistiocytic proliferations of the skin and tendons. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 116. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 
 Review Date 7/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia