
 Cyanotic heart disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cyanotic heart disease refers to a group of many different heart defects that are present at birth (congenital). They result in a low blood oxygen level. Cyanosis refers to a bluish color of the skin and mucous membranes. Causes 
 
 Normally, blood returns from the body and flows through the heart and lungs.  Blood that is low in oxygen (blue blood) returns from the body to the right side of the heart. The right side of the heart then pumps the blood to the lungs, where it picks up more oxygen and becomes red. The oxygen-rich blood returns from the lungs to the left side of the heart. From there, it is pumped to the rest of the body.  Heart defects that children are born with can change the way blood flows through the heart and lungs. This causes non-oxygenated blood to be pumped out to the body without going through the lungs to pick up oxygen. As a result: The blood that is pumped out to the body is lower in oxygen. Less oxygen delivered to the body can make the skin look blue ( cyanosis ). Many of these heart defects involve the heart valves. Heart valves are found between the heart and the large blood vessels that bring blood to and from the heart. These valves open up enough for blood to flow through. Then they close, keeping blood from flowing backward.  Heart valve defects that can cause cyanosis include: Tricuspid valve (the valve between the 2 chambers on the right side of the heart)  may be absent  or unable to open wide enough. Pulmonary valve (the valve between the heart and the lungs)  may be absent  or  unable to open wide enough . Aortic valve (the valve between the heart and the blood vessel to the rest of the body) is unable to open wide enough.  Other heart defects that may cause cyanosis include: Coarctation or complete interruption of the aorta Ebstein anomaly Hypoplastic left heart syndrome Tetralogy of Fallot Total anomalous pulmonary venous return Transposition of the great arteries Truncus arteriosus Cyanotic heart diseases may be caused by: Chemical exposure Genetic and chromosomal syndromes, such as  Down syndrome ,  trisomy 13 ,  Turner syndrome ,  Marfan syndrome , and  Noonan syndrome Infections (such as  rubella ) during pregnancy Poorly controlled blood sugar level in women who have diabetes during pregnancy Medicines prescribed by your doctor or bought on your own and used during pregnancy Street drugs used during pregnancy  Symptoms 
 
 Some heart defects cause major problems right after birth. The main symptom is cyanosis. This is a bluish color of the lips, fingers, and toes that is caused by the low oxygen content in the blood. It may occur while the child is resting or only when the child is active. Some children have breathing problems (dyspnea). They may get into a squatting position after physical activity to relieve breathlessness. Others have spells, in which their bodies are suddenly starved of oxygen. During these spells, symptoms may include: Anxiety Breathing too quickly (hyperventilation) Sudden increase in bluish color to the skin Infants may get tired or sweat while feeding and may not gain as much weight as they should. Fainting (syncope) and chest pain may occur. Other symptoms depend on the type of cyanotic heart disease, and may include: Feeding problems or reduced appetite, leading to poor growth Grayish skin Puffy eyes or face Tiredness all the time Exams and Tests 
 
 Physical examination  confirms cyanosis. Older children may have  clubbed fingers. The doctor will listen to the heart and lungs with a stethoscope. Abnormal heart sounds, a heart murmur, and lung crackles may be heard. Tests will vary depending on the cause, but may include: Chest x-ray Checking oxygen level in the blood using an  arterial blood gas test  or by checking it through the skin with a pulse oximeter Complete blood count (CBC) ECG  (electrocardiogram) Looking at the heart structure and blood vessels using  echocardiogram  or  MRI of the heart Passing a thin flexible tube (catheter) into the right or left side of the heart, usually from the groin ( cardiac catheterization ) Transcutaneous oxygen monitor (pulse oximeter) Echo-Doppler Testing the heart's electrical system Treatment 
 
 Some infants may need to stay in the hospital after birth so they can receive oxygen or be put on a breathing machine. They may receive medicines to: Get rid of extra fluids Help the heart pump harder Keep certain blood vessels open Treat abnormal heartbeats or rhythms The treatment of choice for most congenital heart diseases is  surgery to repair the defect . There are many types of surgery, depending on the kind of birth defect. Surgery may be needed soon after birth, or it may be delayed for months or even years. Your child may need to take water pills (diuretics) and other heart medicines before or after surgery. Be sure to follow the correct dosage. Regular follow-up with the doctor is important. Many children who have had heart surgery must take antibiotics before, and sometimes after having any dental work or other medical procedures. Make sure you have clear instructions from your child's heart doctor.  Ask your child's doctor before getting any immunizations. Most children can follow the recommended guidelines for childhood vaccinations. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the specific disorder. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of cyanotic heart disease include: Abnormal heart rhythms and sudden death Chronic high blood pressure in the blood vessels of the lung Heart failure Infection in the heart Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your baby has: Bluish skin (cyanosis) or grayish skin Breathing difficulty Chest pain or other pain Dizziness, fainting, or heart palpitations Feeding problems or reduced appetite Fever, nausea, or vomiting Puffy eyes or face Tiredness all the time Prevention 
 
 Women who are pregnant should get good prenatal care. Avoid using alcohol and drugs during pregnancy.  Tell your doctor that you are pregnant before taking any prescribed medicines. Get a blood test early in the pregnancy to see if you are immune to rubella. If you are not immune, you must avoid any exposure to rubella and should get immunized right after delivery. Pregnant women with diabetes should try to get good control over their blood sugar level.  Some inherited factors may play a role in congenital heart disease. Many family members may be affected. If you are planning to get pregnant, talk to your doctor about screening for genetic diseases.  Alternative Names 
 
 Right-to-left cardiac shunt; Right-to-left circulatory shunt Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Cardiac catheterization 
 Heart, front view 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Clubbing 
 Cyanotic heart disease 
 References 
 
 Bernstein D. Cyanotic congenital heart disease. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 429. Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, Redington AN. Congenital heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Acne 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Ellis-van Creveld syndrome 
 Marfan syndrome 
 Noonan syndrome 
 Rubella 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Total anomalous pulmonary venous return 
 Transposition of the great vessels 
 Tricuspid atresia 
 Trisomy 13 
 Truncus arteriosus 
 Turner syndrome 
 
 Review Date 10/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Larry A. Weinrauch, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Cardiovascular Disease and Clinical Outcomes Research, Watertown, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia