
 Cysticercosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cysticercosis is an infection by a parasite called  Taenia solium  ( T solium ). It is a pork tapeworm that creates cysts in different areas in the body. Causes 
 
 Cysticercosis is caused by swallowing eggs from  T solium . The eggs are found in contaminated food. Autoinfection is when a person who is already infected with adult  T solium  swallows its eggs. This occurs due to improper hand washing after a bowel movement. Risk factors include eating pork, fruits, and vegetables contaminated with  T solium  as a result of undercooking or improper food preparation. The disease can also be spread by contact with infected feces. The disease is rare in the United States. It is common in many developing countries. Symptoms 
 
 Most often, the worms stay in muscles and do not cause symptoms. Symptoms that do occur depend on where the infection is found in the body: Brain:  Seizures  or symptoms similar to those of a  brain tumor Eyes: Decreased vision or blindness Heart: Abnormal heart rhythms or heart failure (rare) Spine: Weakness or changes in walking due to damage to nerves in the spine Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Blood tests to detect antibodies to the parasite Biopsy  of the affected area CT  scan,  MRI  scan, or  x-rays  to detect the lesion Spinal tap (lumbar puncture) Test in which an ophthalmologist looks inside the fundus of the eye Treatment 
 
 Treatment may involve: Medicines to kill the parasites, such as albendazole or praziquantel Powerful anti-inflammatories (steroids) to reduce swelling  If the cyst is in the eye or brain, steroids should be started a few days before other medicines to avoid problems caused by swelling during antiparasitic treatment. Not all people benefit from antiparasitic treatment. Sometimes, surgery may be needed to remove the infected area. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is good, unless the lesion has caused blindness, heart failure, or brain damage. These are rare complications. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blindness, decreased vision Heart failure or abnormal heart rhythm Hydrocephalus  (fluid buildup in part of the brain, often with increased pressure) Seizures  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have any symptoms of cysticercosis, contact your health care provider. Prevention 
 
 Avoid unwashed foods, do not eat uncooked foods while traveling, and always wash fruits and vegetables well.  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 White AC, Brunetti E. Cestodes. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 354. White AC, Fischer PR. Cysticerosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 303. Read More 
 
 Cyst 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia