
 Cystoscopy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cystoscopy is a surgical procedure. This is performed to see the inside of the bladder and urethra using a telescope. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Cystoscopy is performed with a cystoscope. Cystoscope is a special tube with a small camera on the end (endoscope). There are two types of cystoscopes: Standard, rigid cystoscope Flexible cystoscope The tube can be inserted in different ways. However, the test is the same. Which cystoscope your health care provider uses depends on the purpose of the exam. The procedure will take about take 5 to 20 minutes. The urethra is cleansed. A numbing medicine is applied to the skin lining the inside of the urethra. This is done without needles. The scope is then inserted through the urethra into the bladder. Water or salt water (saline) flows through the tube to fill the bladder. As this occurs, you may be asked to describe the feeling. Your answer will give some information about your condition. As fluid fills the bladder, it stretches the bladder wall. This lets your provider see the entire bladder wall. You will feel the need to urinate when the bladder is full. However, the bladder must stay full until the exam is finished. If any tissue looks abnormal, a small sample can be taken ( biopsy ) through the tube. This sample will be sent to a lab to be tested. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Ask your provider if you should stop taking any medicines that could thin your blood. The procedure may be done in a hospital or surgery center. In that case, you will need to have someone take you home afterward. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight discomfort when the tube is passed through the urethra into the bladder. You will feel an uncomfortable, strong need to urinate when your bladder is full. You may feel a quick pinch if a biopsy is taken. After the tube is removed, the urethra may be sore. You may have blood in the urine and a burning sensation during urination for a day or two. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to: Check for  cancer  of the bladder or urethra Diagnose the cause of blood in the urine Diagnose the cause of problems passing urine Diagnose the cause of repeated bladder infections Help determine the cause of  pain during urination Normal Results 
 
 The bladder wall should look smooth. The bladder should be of normal size, shape, and position. There should be no blockages, growths, or stones. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The abnormal results could indicate: Bladder cancer Bladder stones  (calculi) Bladder wall decompression Chronic  urethritis Congenital (present at birth) abnormality Cysts Diverticula Some other possible diagnoses may be: Irritable bladder Polyps Prostate problems, such as bleeding,  enlargement , or blockage Traumatic injury of the bladder and urethra Ulcer Urethral strictures Risks 
 
 There is a slight risk for excess bleeding when a biopsy is taken. Other risks include: Bladder infection Rupture of the bladder wall Considerations 
 
 Drink 4 to 6 glasses of water per day after the procedure. You may notice a small amount of blood in your urine after this procedure. If the bleeding continues after you urinate 3 times, contact your provider. Contact your provider if you develop any of these signs of infection: Chills Fever Pain Reduced urine output  Alternative Names 
 
 Cystourethroscopy; Endoscopy of the bladder Images 
 
 
 Cystoscopy 
 References 
 
 Duty BD, Conlin MJ. Principles of urologic endoscopy. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 7. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy.  www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/diagnostic-tests/cystoscopy-ureteroscopy/Pages/default.aspx . Accessed June 14, 2016. Smith TG, Coburn M. Urologic surgery. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 73. Read More 
 
 Bladder stones 
 Cancer 
 Cyst 
 Diverticulitis 
 Enlarged prostate 
 Erosion 
 Traumatic injury of the bladder and urethra 
 Urethral stricture 
 Urge incontinence 
 Urination - painful 
 
 Review Date 5/23/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Endoscopy 
 Enlarged Prostate (BPH) 
 Interstitial Cystitis 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia