
 Dacryoadenitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dacryoadenitis is inflammation of the tear-producing gland (lacrimal gland). Causes 
 
 Acute dacryoadenitis is most commonly due to viral or bacterial infection. Common causes include  mumps ,  Epstein-Barr virus , staphylococcus, and gonococcus. Chronic dacryoadenitis is most often due to noninfectious inflammatory disorders. Examples include  sarcoidosis , thyroid eye disease, and  orbital pseudotumor . Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Swelling of the outer portion of the upper lid, with possible redness and tenderness
    Pain in the area of swelling
    Excess tearing or discharge
    Swelling of lymph nodes in front of the ear Exams and Tests 
 
 Dacryoadenitis can be diagnosed by an examination of the eyes and lids. Special tests, such as a  CT scan  may be required to search for the cause. Sometimes a biopsy will be needed to make sure that a  tumor of the lacrimal gland  is not present. Treatment 
 
 If the cause of dacryoadenitis is a viral condition such as mumps, rest and warm compresses may be enough. In other cases, the treatment depends on the disease that caused dacryoadenitis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people will fully recover from dacryoadenitis. For more serious causes, such as sarcoidosis, the outlook depends on the disease that caused this condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Swelling may be severe enough to put pressure on the eye and distort vision. Some people who were first thought to have dacryoadenitis may turn out to have cancer of the lacrimal gland. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if swelling or pain increase despite treatment. Prevention 
 
 Mumps can be prevented by getting vaccinated. You can avoid getting infected with gonococcus, the bacteria that cause gonorrhea, by using safe sex practices. Most other causes cannot be prevented. References 
 
 Durand ML. Periocular infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 118. Karesh JW, On AV, Hirschbein MJ. Noninfectious orbital inflammatory disease. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 2, chap 35. Read More 
 
 Mononucleosis 
 Mumps 
 Orbital pseudotumor 
 Sarcoidosis 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia