
 Death among children and adolescents 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The information below is from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Accidents (unintentional injuries) are, by far, the leading cause of death among children and teens. THE TOP THREE CAUSES OF DEATH BY AGE GROUP 0 to 1 year: Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth Conditions due to premature birth (short gestation) Health problems of the mother during pregnancy 1 to 4 years: Accidents (unintentional injuries) Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth Homicide  5 to 14 years: Accidents (unintentional injuries) Cancer Suicide CONDITIONS PRESENT AT BIRTH Some birth defects cannot be prevented. Other problems may be diagnosed during pregnancy. These conditions, when recognized, may be prevented or treated while the baby is still in the womb or right after birth. Tests that may be done before or during pregnancy include:  Amniocentesis Chorionic villus sampling Fetal ultrasound Genetic screening of the parents Medical histories and childbirth history of the parents PREMATURITY AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT Death due to prematurity often results from a lack of  prenatal care . If you are pregnant and are not receiving prenatal care, call your health care provider or local department of health. Most state health departments have programs that provide prenatal care to mothers, even if they DO NOT have insurance and are not able to pay. All sexually active and pregnant teens should be educated about the importance of prenatal care. SUICIDE It is important to watch teens for signs of stress,  depression , and  suicidal behavior . Open communication between the teen and parents or other persons of trust is very important for preventing teen suicide. HOMICIDE Homicide is a complex issue that does not have a simple answer. Prevention requires an understanding of the root causes and a willingness of the public to change those causes. AUTO ACCIDENTS The automobile accounts for the largest number of accidental deaths. All infants and children should use the proper child car seats, booster seats, and seat belts. Other top causes of accidental death are drowning, fire, falls, and poisoning. Alternative Names 
 
 Childhood and adolescent causes of death Images 
 
 
 Adolescent pregnancy 
 Support group counselors 
 References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Child health. Updated October 6, 2016.  www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/child-health.htm . Accessed October 25, 2016. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Deaths: final data for 2013. National vital statistics reports. Vol. 64, Number 2. Updated February 16, 2016.  www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr64/nvsr64_02.pdf . Accessed October 25, 2016. 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Health Statistics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia