
 Delirium 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Delirium is sudden severe  confusion  due to rapid changes in brain function that occur with physical or mental illness. Causes 
 
 Delirium is most often caused by physical or mental illness, and is usually temporary and reversible. Many disorders cause delirium. Often, these do not allow the brain to get oxygen or other substances. They may also cause dangerous chemicals (toxins) to build up in the brain. Causes include: Alcohol or medicine overdose or withdrawal Drug use or overdose Electrolyte  or other body chemical disturbances Infections such as  urinary tract infections  or  pneumonia Severe lack of sleep Poisons Symptoms 
 
 Delirium involves a quick change between mental states (for example, from  lethargy  to  agitation  and back to lethargy). Symptoms include: Changes in alertness (usually more alert in the morning, less alert at night) Changes in feeling (sensation) and perception Changes in level of consciousness  or awareness Changes in movement (for example, may be slow moving or hyperactive) Changes in sleep patterns,  drowsiness Confusion (disorientation) about time or place Decrease in short-term memory and recall Disorganized thinking, such as talking in a way that doesn't make sense Emotional or personality changes, such as anger, agitation, depression, irritability, overly happy Incontinence Movements triggered by changes in the nervous system Problem concentrating Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may have abnormal results: An exam of the nervous system (neurologic examination), including tests of feeling (sensation), thinking (cognitive function), and motor function Neuropsychological studies  The following tests may also be done: Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis  (spinal tap) Electroencephalogram  (EEG) Head CT scan Head MRI scan Mental status test  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control or reverse the cause of the symptoms. Treatment depends on the condition causing delirium. The person may need to stay in the hospital for a short time. Stopping or changing medicines that worsen confusion, or that are not necessary, may improve mental function.  Disorders that contribute to confusion should be treated. These may include: Anemia Decreased oxygen ( hypoxia ) Heart failure High carbon dioxide levels ( hypercapnia ) Infections Kidney failure Liver failure Nutritional disorders Psychiatric conditions (such as depression or psychosis) Thyroid disorders  Treating medical and mental disorders often greatly improves mental function. Medicines may be needed to control aggressive or agitated behaviors. These are usually started at very low dosages and adjusted as needed. Some people with delirium may benefit from hearing aids, glasses, or  cataract surgery . Other treatments that may be helpful: Behavior modification to control unacceptable or dangerous behaviors Reality  orientation  to reduce  disorientation Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Acute conditions that cause delirium may occur with  chronic  disorders that cause  dementia . Acute brain syndromes may be reversible by treating the cause. Delirium often lasts about 1 week. It may take several weeks for mental function to return to normal. Full recovery is common, but depends on the underlying cause of the delirium. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that may result from delirium include: Loss of ability to function or care for self Loss of ability to interact Progression to  stupor  or  coma Side effects of medicines used to treat the disorder When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if there is a rapid  change in mental status . Prevention 
 
 Treating the conditions that cause delirium can reduce its risk. In hospitalized people, avoiding or using a low dosage of sedatives, prompt treatment of metabolic disorders and infections, and using reality orientation programs will reduce the risk of delirium in those at high risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Acute confusional state; Acute brain syndrome Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Irwin SA, Pirrello RD, Hirst JM, Buckholz GT, Ferris FD. Clarifying delirium management: practical, evidenced-based, expert recommendations for clinical practice.  J Palliat Med . 2013;16:423-435. PMID: 23480299  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23480299 . Mendez MF, Padilla CR. Delirium. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 4. Smith JP, Seirafi J. Delirium and dementia. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 104. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Confusion 
 Electrolytes 
 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Delirium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia