
 Delirium tremens 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Delirium tremens is a severe form of alcohol withdrawal. It involves sudden and severe mental or nervous system changes. Causes 
 
 Delirium tremens can occur when you stop drinking alcohol after a period of heavy drinking, especially if you do not eat enough food. Delirium tremens may also be caused by head injury, infection, or illness in people with a history of heavy alcohol use. It is most common in people who have a history of  alcohol withdrawal . It is especially common in those who drink 4 to 5 pints (1.8 to 2.3 liters) of wine, 7 to 8 pints (3.5 to 4 liters) of beer, or 1 pint (1/2 liter) of "hard" alcohol every day for several months. Delirium tremens also commonly affects people who have used alcohol for more than 10 years. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms most often occur within 48 to 96 hours after the last drink. But, they can occur 7 to 10 days after the last drink. Symptoms may get worse quickly, and can include: Body tremors Changes in mental function Agitation, irritability Confusion , disorientation Decreased  attention span Deep sleep that lasts for a day or longer Delirium Excitement Fear Hallucinations  (seeing or feeling things that are not really there) Increased activity Quick  mood changes Restlessness , excitement Sensitivity to light, sound, touch Stupor , sleepiness,  fatigue Seizures (may occur without other symptoms of DTs): Most common in the first 12 to 48 hours after the last drink Most common in people with past complications from alcohol withdrawal Usually  generalized tonic-clonic seizures Symptoms of alcohol withdrawal, including:  Anxiety ,  depression Fatigue Headache Insomnia (difficulty falling and staying asleep) Irritability or excitability Loss of appetite Nausea , vomiting Nervousness, jumpiness Pale skin Palpitations  (sensation of feeling the heart beat) Rapid emotional changes Shakiness Sweating , especially on the palms of the hands or the face  Other symptoms that may occur: Chest pain Fever Stomach pain Exams and Tests 
 
 Delirium tremens is a medical emergency. The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Signs may include: Heavy sweating Increased startle reflex Irregular heartbeat Problems with eye muscle movement Rapid heart rate Rapid muscle tremors  The following tests may be done: Blood magnesium level Blood phosphate level Comprehensive metabolic panel Electrocardiogram  (ECG) Electroencephalogram  (EEG) Toxicology screen Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to: Save the person's life Relieve symptoms Prevent complications  A hospital stay is needed. The health care team will regularly check: Blood chemistry results, such as  electrolyte  levels Body fluid levels Vital signs (temperature, pulse, breathing rate, blood pressure)  While in the hospital, the person will receive medicines to: Stay calm and relaxed (sedated) until the DTs are finished Treat seizures, anxiety, or tremors Treat mental disorders, if any  Long-term preventive treatment should begin after the patient recovers from DT symptoms. This may involve: A "drying out" period, in which no alcohol is allowed Total and lifelong avoidance of alcohol (abstinence) Counseling Going to support groups (such as Alcoholics Anonymous)  Treatment may be needed for other medical problems that can occur with alcohol use, including: Alcoholic cardiomyopathy Alcoholic liver disease Alcoholic neuropathy Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome Support Groups 
 
 Attending a  support group  regularly is a key to recovering from alcohol use. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Delirium tremens is serious and may be life-threatening. Some symptoms related to alcohol withdrawal may last for a year or more, including: Emotional mood swings Feeling tired Sleeplessness  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can include: Injury from falls during seizures Injury to self or others caused by mental state (confusion/delirium) Irregular heartbeat, may be life threatening Seizures  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms. Delirium tremens is an emergency condition. Prevention 
 
 Avoid or reduce the use of alcohol. Get prompt medical treatment for symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Alternative Names 
 
 DTs; Alcohol withdrawal - delirium tremens; Alcohol withdrawal delirium References 
 
 Ferri, FF. Delirium tremens. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015.  1st ed. Philadelphia: PA Elsevier Mosby; 2015:p. 357. O'Connor PG. Alcohol use disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Alcohol withdrawal 
 Psychosis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 2/8/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 Delirium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia