
 Dementia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dementia is a loss of brain function that occurs with certain diseases. It affects memory, thinking, language, judgment, and behavior. Causes 
 
 Dementia usually occurs in older age. It is rare in people under age 60. The risk of dementia increases as a person gets older. Most types of dementia are nonreversible (degenerative). Nonreversible means the changes in the brain that are causing the dementia cannot be stopped or turned back.  Alzheimer disease  is the most common type of dementia. Another common type of dementia is  vascular dementia . It is caused by many small strokes. Lewy body disease is a common cause of dementia in older adults. People with this condition have abnormal protein structures in certain areas of the brain. The following medical conditions can also lead to dementia: Huntington disease Brain injury Multiple sclerosis Infections such as HIV/ AIDS ,  syphilis , and  Lyme disease Parkinson disease Pick disease Progressive supranuclear palsy Some causes of dementia may be stopped or reversed if they are found soon enough, including: Brain injury Brain tumors Chronic alcohol abuse Changes in blood sugar, sodium, and calcium levels ( dementia due to metabolic causes ) Low  vitamin B12  level Normal pressure hydrocephalus Use of certain medicines, including cimetidine and some cholesterol drugs  Symptoms 
 
 Dementia symptoms include difficulty with many areas of mental function, including: Emotional behavior or personality Language Memory Perception Thinking and judgment (cognitive skills)  Dementia usually first appears as forgetfulness. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is the stage between normal forgetfulness due to aging and the development of dementia. People with MCI have mild problems with thinking and memory that do not interfere with daily activities. They often know about their forgetfulness. Not everyone with MCI develops dementia. Symptoms of MCI include: Difficulty doing more than one task at a time Difficulty solving problems or making decisions Forgetting recent events or conversations Taking longer to do more difficult mental activities  Early symptoms of dementia can include: Difficulty with tasks that take some thought, but that used to come easily, such as balancing a checkbook, playing games (such as bridge), and learning new information or routines Getting lost on familiar routes Language problems, such as trouble with the names of familiar objects Losing interest in things previously enjoyed, flat mood Misplacing items Personality changes and loss of social skills, which can lead to inappropriate behaviors  As dementia becomes worse, symptoms are more obvious and interfere with the ability to take care of oneself. Symptoms may include: Change in sleep patterns, often waking up at night Difficulty with basic tasks, such as preparing meals, choosing proper clothing, or driving Forgetting details about current events Forgetting events in one's own life history, losing self-awareness Having  hallucinations , arguments, striking out, and violent behavior Having delusions, depression, agitation More difficulty reading or writing Poor judgment and loss of ability to recognize danger Using the wrong word, not pronouncing words correctly, speaking in confusing sentences Withdrawing from social contact  People with severe dementia can no longer: Perform basic activities of daily living, such as eating, dressing, and bathing Recognize family members Understand language  Other symptoms that may occur with dementia: Problems controlling bowel movements or urine Swallowing problems  Exams and Tests 
 
 A skilled health care provider can often diagnose dementia using the following: Complete physical exam, including nervous system exam Asking about the person's medical history and symptoms Mental function tests (mental status examination)  Other tests may be ordered to find out if other problems may be causing dementia or making it worse. These conditions include: Anemia Brain tumor Chronic infection Intoxication from medicines Severe depression Thyroid disease Vitamin deficiency  The following tests and procedures may be done: B12 level Blood  ammonia  levels Blood chemistry ( chem-20 ) Blood gas analysis Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis Drug or alcohol levels ( toxicology screen ) Electroencephalograph  (EEG) Head CT Mental status test MRI of head Thyroid function tests , including thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroid stimulating hormone  level Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the condition causing the dementia. Some people may need to stay in the hospital for a short time. Sometimes, dementia medicine can make a person's confusion worse. Stopping or changing these medicines is part of the treatment. Certain mental exercises can help with dementia. Treating conditions that can lead to confusion often greatly improve mental function. Such conditions include: Anemia Congestive heart failure Decreased blood oxygen ( hypoxia ) Depression Heart failure Infections Nutritional disorders Thyroid disorders  Medicines may be used to: Slow the rate at which symptoms get worse, though improvement with these drugs may be small Control problems with behavior, such as loss of judgment or confusion  Someone with dementia will need  support in the home  as the disease gets worse. Family members or other caregivers can help by helping the person cope with  memory loss  and  behavior and sleep problems . It is important to make sure the homes of people who have dementia are  safe for them .  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with MCI do not always develop dementia. When dementia does occur, it usually gets worse over time. Dementia often decreases quality of life and lifespan. Families will likely need to plan for their loved one's  future care . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Dementia develops or a sudden  change in mental status  occurs The condition of a person with dementia gets worse You are unable to care for a person with dementia at home Prevention 
 
 Most causes of dementia are not preventable. The risk of vascular dementia may be reduced by preventing strokes through: Eating healthy foods Exercising Quitting smoking Controlling high blood pressure Managing diabetes  Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic brain syndrome; Lewy body dementia; DLB; Vascular dementia; Mild cognitive impairment; MCI Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Galvin JE, Sadowsky CH; NINCDS-ADRDA. Practical guidelines for the recognition and diagnosis of dementia.  J Am Board Fam Med . 2012;25(3):367-382. PMID: 22570400  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22570400 . Knopman DS. Alzheimer disease and other dementias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 402. Mitchell SL. CLINICAL PRACTICE. Advanced Dementia.  N Engl J Med . 2015;372(26):2533-2540. PMID: 26107053  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26107053 . Peterson R, Graff-Radford J. Alzheimer disease and other dementias. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 95. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Dementia due to metabolic causes 
 Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Communicating with someone with aphasia 
 Dementia and driving 
 Dementia - behavior and sleep problems 
 Dementia - daily care 
 Dementia - keeping safe in the home 
 Dementia - what to ask your doctor  
 Dysarthria - care 
 Eating extra calories when sick - adults 
 Preventing falls 
 Review Date 8/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dementia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia