
 Dengue hemorrhagic fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dengue hemorrhagic fever is a severe, potentially deadly infection spread by some mosquitos. Causes 
 
 Four different dengue viruses are known to cause dengue hemorrhagic fever. Dengue hemorrhagic fever occurs when a person is bitten by a mosquito that is infected with the virus. The mosquito  Aedes aegypti  is the main species that spreads this disease. There are more than 100 million new cases of dengue fever every year throughout the world. A small number of these develop into dengue hemorrhagic fever. Most infections in the United States are brought in from other countries. Risk factors for dengue hemorrhagic fever include having antibodies to dengue virus from an earlier infection.  Symptoms 
 
 Early symptoms of dengue hemorrhagic fever are similar to those of dengue fever. But after several days the infected person becomes irritable,  restless , and sweaty. These symptoms are followed by a  shock -like state. Bleeding appears as tiny spots of blood on the skin and larger patches of blood under the skin. Minor injuries can cause bleeding. Shock can lead to death. If the person survives, recovery begins after a 1-day crisis period. Early symptoms include: Decreased appetite Fever Headache Joint or muscle aches General ill feeling Vomiting  Acute  phase symptoms include restlessness followed by: Patches of blood under the skin Tiny spots of blood on the skin Generalized rash Worsening early symptoms  The acute phase also includes a shock-like state with: Cold, clammy arms and legs Sweating  Exams and Tests 
 
 A  physical examination  may reveal: Enlarged liver Low blood pressure Rash Red eyes Red throat Swollen glands Weak,  rapid pulse Tests may include: Arterial blood gases Blood tests (to find signs of the virus in the blood) Coagulation studies Electrolytes Hematocrit Liver enzymes Platelet count Serum studies from samples taken during acute illness and afterward Tourniquet test (causes blood patches to form below the tourniquet) X-ray of the chest  (may show buildup of fluid in the lungs and chest) Treatment 
 
 Because dengue hemorrhagic fever is caused by a virus for which there is no known cure or vaccine, the only treatment is to treat the symptoms. These treatments may include: A transfusion of fresh blood or  platelets  to correct bleeding problems Intravenous  (IV) fluids and electrolytes to correct  electrolyte imbalances Oxygen therapy to treat abnormally low blood oxygen Rehydration with intravenous (IV) fluids to treat dehydration Supportive care in an intensive care unit or similar setting  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With early and aggressive care, most people recover from dengue hemorrhagic fever. However, half of untreated people who go into shock do not survive. Possible Complications 
 
 Dengue hemorrhagic fever may cause these complications: Brain disease Liver damage Residual brain damage Seizures Shock  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider right away if you have symptoms of dengue fever and have been in an area where dengue fever occurs, especially if you have had dengue fever before. Prevention 
 
 Because there is no way to prevent dengue fever, use personal protection such as: Full-coverage clothing Mosquito nets Mosquito repellent containing DEET  If possible, travel during times of the day when mosquitoes are less active. Mosquito control programs can also reduce the risk of infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemorrhagic dengue; Dengue shock syndrome; Philippine hemorrhagic fever; Thai hemorrhagic fever; Singapore hemorrhagic fever Images 
 
 
 Mosquito, adult feeding on the skin 
 Mosquito, adult 
 Mosquito, egg raft 
 Mosquito, larvae 
 Mosquito, pupa 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Thomas SJ, Endy TP, Rothman AL, Barrett AD. Flaviviruses (dengue, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis, Kyasanur Forest disease, Alkhurma hemorrhagic fever, Zika). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 155. Read More 
 
 Dengue fever 
 Immune response 
 
 Review Date 11/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dengue 
 Browse the Encyclopedia