
 Dependent personality disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dependent personality disorder is a mental condition in which people depend too much on others to meet their emotional and physical needs. Causes 
 
 Causes of dependent personality disorder are unknown. The disorder usually begins in childhood. It is one of the most common personality disorders and is equally common in men and women. Symptoms 
 
 People with this disorder DO NOT trust their own ability to make decisions. They may be very upset by separation and loss. They may go to great lengths, even suffering abuse, to stay in a relationship. Symptoms of dependent personality disorder may include: Avoiding being alone Avoiding personal responsibility Becoming easily hurt by criticism or disapproval Becoming overly focused on fears of being abandoned Becoming very passive in relationships Feeling very upset or helpless when relationships end Having difficulty making decisions without support from others Having problems expressing disagreements with others Exams and Tests 
 
 Dependent personality disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. Treatment 
 
 Talk therapy is considered to be the most effective treatment. The aim is to help people with this condition make more independent choices in life. Medicines may help treat other mental conditions, such as anxiety or depression, which occur along with this disorder. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Improvements are usually seen only with long-term therapy. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Alcohol  or  substance use Depression Increased likelihood of physical, emotional, or sexual abuse  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your provider or a mental health professional if you or your child has symptoms of dependent personality disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Personality disorder - dependent References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Dependent personality disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013;675-678. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Hopwood CJ. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Depression - overview 
 
 Review Date 11/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia