
 Developmental milestones record - 4 years 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The typical 4-year-old child will demonstrate certain physical and mental skills. These skills are called developmental milestones. Information 
 
 All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider. PHYSICAL AND MOTOR During the fourth year, a child typically: Gains weight at the rate of about 6 grams (less than one quarter of an ounce) per day Weighs 40 pounds (18 kilograms) and is 40 inches (1 meter) tall Has 20/20 vision Sleeps 11 to 13 hours at night, usually without a daytime nap Grows to a height that is double the birth length Shows improved balance Hops on one foot without losing balance Throws a ball overhand with coordination Can cut out a picture using scissors May still wet the bed  SENSORY AND COGNITIVE The typical 4-year-old: Has a vocabulary of more than 1,000 words Easily puts together sentences of four or five words Can use the past tense Can count to four Will be curious and ask a lot of questions May use words they do not fully understand May begin using vulgar words Learns and sings simple songs Tries to be very independent May show increased aggressive behavior Talks about personal family matters to others Commonly has imaginary playmates Has an increased understanding of time Is able to tell the difference between two objects based on things like size and weight Lacks moral concepts of right and wrong Rebels if too much is expected of them  PLAY As the parent of a 4-year-old, you should: Encourage and provide space for physical activity. Show your child how to participate in and follow the rules of sporting activities. Encourage play and sharing with other children. Encourage creative play. Teach your child to do small chores, such as setting the table. Read together. Limit screen time (television and other media) to 2 hours a day of quality programs. Expose your child to different stimuli by visiting local areas of interest.  Alternative Names 
 
 Normal childhood growth milestones - 4 years; Growth milestones for children - 4 years; Childhood growth milestones - 4 years References 
 
 Feigelman S. The preschool years. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 10. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Child Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia