
 Developmental milestones record - 4 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Typical 4-month-old infants are expected to develop certain physical and mental skills. These skills are called milestones. Information 
 
 All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider. PHYSICAL AND MOTOR SKILLS The typical 4-month-old baby should: Slow in weight gain to about 20 grams (almost two thirds of an ounce) per day Weigh 2 times more than their birth weight Have almost no head droop while in a sitting position Be able to sit straight if propped up Raise head 90 degrees when placed on stomach Be able to roll from front to back Hold and let go of an object Play with a rattle when it's placed in their hands, but won't be able to pick it up if dropped Be able to grasp a rattle with both hands Be able to place objects in the mouth Sleep 9 to 10 hours at night with 2 naps during the day (total of 14 to 16 hours per day)  SENSORY AND COGNITIVE SKILLS A 4-month-old baby is expected to: Have well-established close vision Increase eye contact with parents and others Have beginning hand-eye coordination Be able to coo Be able to laugh out loud Anticipate feeding when able to see a bottle (if bottle-fed) Begin to show memory Demand attention by fussing Recognize parent's voice or touch  PLAY You can encourage development through play: Place the baby in front of a mirror. Provide bright-colored toys to hold. Repeat sounds the infant makes. Help the infant roll over. Use an infant swing at the park if the baby has head control. Play on the stomach (tummy time) Alternative Names 
 
 Normal childhood growth milestones - 4 months; Childhood growth milestones - 4 months; Growth milestones for children - 4 months References 
 
 Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 8. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia