
 Developmental milestones record - 18 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The typical 18-month-old child will demonstrate certain physical and mental skills. These skills are called developmental milestones. Information 
 
 All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider. PHYSICAL AND MOTOR SKILL MARKERS The typical 18-month-old: Has a closed soft spot on the front of the head Is growing at a slower rate and has less of an appetite compared to the months before Is able to control the muscles used to urinate and have bowel movements, but may not be ready to use the toilet Runs stiffly and falls often Is able to get onto small chairs without help Walks up stairs while holding on with 1 hand Can build a tower of 2 to 4 blocks Can use a spoon and cup with help to feed self Imitates scribbling Can turn 2 or 3 pages of a book at a time  SENSORY AND COGNITIVE MARKERS The typical 18-month-old: Shows affection Has separation anxiety Listens to a story or looks at pictures Can say 10 or more words when asked Kisses parents with lips puckered Identifies 1 or more parts of the body Understands and is able to point to and identify common objects Often imitates Is able to take off some clothing items, such as gloves, hats, and socks Begins to feel a sense of ownership, identifying people and objects by saying "my"  PLAY RECOMMENDATIONS Encourage and provide the necessary space for physical activity. Provide safe copies of adult tools and equipment for the child to play with. Allow the child to help around the house and participate in the family's daily responsibilities. Encourage play that involves building and creativity. Read to the child. Encourage play dates with children of the same age. Avoid television and other screen time before age 2. Play simple games together, such as puzzles and shape sorting. Use a transitional object to help with separation anxiety.  Alternative Names 
 
 Growth milestones for children - 18 months; Normal childhood growth milestones - 18 months; Childhood growth milestones - 18 months References 
 
 Feigelman S. The second year. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 9. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Toddler Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia