
 Developmental coordination disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Developmental coordination disorder is a childhood disorder that leads to poor coordination and clumsiness. Causes 
 
 A small number of school-age children have some kind of developmental coordination disorder. Children with this disorder may: Have trouble holding objects Have an unsteady walk Run into other children Trip over their own feet  Developmental coordination disorder may occur alone or with  attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  (ADHD) or other learning disorders, such as communication disorders or  disorder of written expression . Symptoms 
 
 Children with developmental coordination disorder have difficulties with motor coordination compared to other children the same age. Some common symptoms include: Clumsiness Delays in sitting up, crawling, and walking Problems with sucking and swallowing during first year of life Problems with gross motor coordination (for example, jumping, hopping, or standing on one foot) Problems with visual or fine motor coordination (for example, writing, using scissors, tying shoelaces, or tapping one finger to another)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Physical causes and other types of learning disabilities must be ruled out before the diagnosis can be confirmed. Treatment 
 
 Physical education and perceptual motor training (combining movement with tasks that require thinking, like math or reading) are the best ways to treat coordination disorder. Using a computer to take notes may help children who have trouble writing. Children with developmental coordination disorder are more likely to be overweight than other children their age. Encouraging physical activity is important to prevent obesity. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a child does depends on the severity of the disorder. The disorder does not get worse over time. It usually continues into adulthood. Possible Complications 
 
 Developmental coordination disorder can lead to: Learning problems Low self-esteem resulting from poor ability at sports and teasing by other children Repeated injuries Weight gain as a result of not wanting to participate in physical activities (such as sports)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with a health care provider if you are concerned about your child's development. Prevention 
 
 Families who are affected by this condition should try to recognize problems early and have them treated. Early treatment will lead to future success. References 
 
 Nass R, Ross G. Developmental disabilities. In: Bradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, eds.  Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2012:chap 61. Read More 
 
 Disorder of written expression 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Developmental Disabilities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia