
 Developmental milestones record - 6 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article describes the skills and growth targets for 6-month-old infants. Information 
 
 Physical and motor skill markers: Able to hold almost all weight when supported in a standing position Able to transfer objects from one hand to the other Able to lift chest and head while on stomach, holding the weight on hands (often occurs by 4 months) Able to pick up a dropped object Able to roll from back to stomach (by 7 months) Able to sit in a high chair with a straight back Able to sit on the floor with lower back support Beginning of  teething Increased  drooling Should be able to sleep 6 to 8 hour stretches at night Should have doubled birth weight (birth weight often doubles by 4 months, and it would be cause for concern if this hasn't happened by 6 months)  Sensory and cognitive markers: Begins to fear strangers Begins to imitate actions and sounds Begins to realize that if an object is dropped, it is still there and just needs to be picked up Can locate sounds not made directly at the ear level Enjoys hearing own voice Makes sounds (vocalizes) to mirror and toys Makes sounds resembling one-syllable words (example: da-da, ba-ba) Prefers more complex sounds Recognizes parents Vision is between 20/60 and 20/40  Play recommendations: Read, sing, and talk to your child Imitate words such as "mama" to help baby learn language Play peek-a-boo Provide an unbreakable mirror Provide large, bright-colored toys that make noise or have moving parts (avoid toys with small parts) Provide paper to tear Blow bubbles Speak clearly Start pointing to and naming parts of the body and the environment Use body movements and actions to teach language Use the word "no" infrequently  Alternative Names 
 
 Normal childhood growth milestones - 6 months; Childhood growth milestones - 6 months; Growth milestones for children - 6 months References 
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Developmental milestones. www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/. Updated May 10, 2016. Accessed March 29, 2016. Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 10. Reimschisel T. Global developmental delay and regression. In: Daroff RB, Jankovich J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 8. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia