
 Developmental milestones record - 12 months 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The typical 12-month-old child will demonstrate certain physical and mental skills. These skills are called developmental milestones. Information 
 
 All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider. PHYSICAL AND MOTOR SKILLS A 12-month-old child is expected to: Be 3 times their birth weight Grow to a height of 50% over birth length Have a  head circumference  equal to that of their chest Have 1 to 8 teeth Stand without holding on to anything Walk alone or when holding 1 hand Sit down without help Bang 2 blocks together Turn through the pages of a book by flipping many pages at a time Pick up a small object using the tip of their thumb and index finger Sleep 8 to 10 hours a night and take 1 to 2 naps during the day  SENSORY AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT The typical 12-month-old: Begins pretend play (such as pretending to drink from a cup) Follows a fast moving object Responds to their name Can say momma, papa, and at least 1 or 2 other words Understands simple commands Tries to imitate animal sounds Connects names with objects Understands that objects continue to exist, even when they can't be seen Participates in getting dressed (raises arms) Plays simple back and forth games (ball game) Points to objects with the index finger Waves bye May develop attachment to a toy or object Experiences  separation anxiety  and may cling to parents May make brief journeys away from parents to explore in familiar settings  PLAY You can help your 12-month-old develop skills through play: Provide picture books. Provide different stimuli, such as going to the mall or zoo. Play ball. Build vocabulary by reading and naming people and objects in the environment. Teach hot and cold through play. Provide large toys that can be pushed to encourage walking. Sing songs. Have a play date with a child of a similar age. Avoid television and other screen time until age 2. Try using a transitional object to help with separation anxiety.  Alternative Names 
 
 Normal childhood growth milestones - 12 months; Growth milestones for children - 12 months; Childhood growth milestones - 12 months References 
 
 Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 8. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Toddler Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia