
 Diabetes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diabetes is a chronic disease in which the body cannot regulate the amount of sugar in the blood. Causes 
 
 Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas to control blood sugar. Diabetes can be caused by too little insulin, resistance to insulin, or both. To understand diabetes, it is important to first understand the normal process by which food is broken down and used by the body for energy. Several things happen when food is digested: A sugar called glucose enters the bloodstream. Glucose is a source of fuel for the body. An organ called the pancreas makes insulin. The role of insulin is to move glucose from the bloodstream into muscle, fat, and liver cells, where it can be stored or used as fuel.  People with diabetes have high blood sugar because their body cannot move sugar from the blood into muscle and fat cells to be burned or stored for energy, and because their liver makes too much glucose and releases it into the blood. This is because either: Their pancreas does not make enough insulin Their cells do not respond to insulin normally Both of the above  There are two major types of diabetes. The causes and risk factors are different for each type: Type 1 diabetes  can occur at any age, but it is most often diagnosed in children, teens, or young adults. In this disease, the body makes little or no insulin. This is because the pancreas cells that make insulin stop working. Daily injections of insulin are needed. The exact cause is unknown. Type 2 diabetes  is much more common. It most often occurs in adulthood, but because of high obesity rates, children and teens are now being diagnosed with this disease. Some people with type 2 diabetes do not know they have it. With type 2 diabetes, the body is resistant to insulin and doesn't use insulin as well as it should. There are other causes of diabetes, and some people cannot be classified as type 1 or type 2.  Gestational diabetes  is high blood sugar that develops at any time during pregnancy in a woman who does not have diabetes. If your parent, brother, or sister has diabetes, you may be more likely to develop the disease. Symptoms 
 
 A high blood sugar level can cause several symptoms, including: Blurry vision Excess thirst Fatigue Frequent urination Hunger Weight loss  Because type 2 diabetes develops slowly, some people with high blood sugar have no symptoms. Symptoms of type 1 diabetes develop over a short period. People may be very sick by the time they are diagnosed. After many years, diabetes can lead to other serious problems. These problems are known as diabetes complications, and include: Eye problems , including trouble seeing (especially at night), light sensitivity, and blindness Sores and infections of the leg or foot, which if untreated, can lead to amputation of the leg or foot Damage to nerves in the body , causing pain, tingling, a loss of feeling, problems digesting food, and erectile dysfunction Kidney problems , which can lead to  kidney failure Weakened immune system, which can lead to more frequent infections Increased chance of having a  heart attack  or  stroke Exams and Tests 
 
 A  urine analysis  may show high blood sugar. But a urine test alone does not diagnose diabetes. Your health care provider may suspect that you have diabetes if your blood sugar level is higher than 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L). To confirm the diagnosis, one or more of the following tests must be done. Blood tests: Fasting blood glucose level . Diabetes is diagnosed if the fasting glucose level is higher than 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) on two different tests. Levels between 100 and 126 mg/dL (5.5 and 7.0 mmol/L) are called impaired fasting glucose or prediabetes. These levels are risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Hemoglobin A1c  (A1C) test. Normal is less than 5.7%; prediabetes is 5.7% to 6.4%; and diabetes is 6.5% or higher. Oral glucose tolerance test . Diabetes is diagnosed if the glucose level is higher than 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) 2 hours after drinking a sugar drink (this test is used more often for type 2 diabetes).  Screening for type 2 diabetes in people who have no symptoms is recommended for: Overweight children who have other risk factors for diabetes, starting at age 10 and repeated every 3 years Overweight adults (BMI of 25 or higher) who have other risk factors Adults over age 45, repeated every 3 years  Treatment 
 
 Type 2 diabetes may be reversed with lifestyle changes, especially losing weight with exercise and by eating healthier foods. Some cases of type 2 diabetes can also be improved with weight loss surgery. There is no cure for type 1 diabetes.  Treating either  type 1 diabetes  or  type 2 diabetes  involves medicines, diet, and exercise to control blood sugar level. Everyone with diabetes should receive proper education and support about the best ways to manage their diabetes. Ask your provider about seeing a diabetes nurse educator.  Getting better control over your blood sugar, cholesterol, and blood pressure levels helps reduce the risk of kidney disease, eye disease, nervous system disease, heart attack, and stroke. To prevent diabetes complications, visit your provider at least 2 to 4 times a year. Talk about any problems you are having. Follow your provider's instructions on managing your diabetes. Support Groups 
 
 Many  resources  can help you understand more about diabetes. If you have diabetes, you can also learn ways to manage your condition and prevent diabetes complications. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Diabetes is a lifelong disease and there is no cure. Tight control of blood glucose can prevent or delay diabetes complications. But these problems can occur, even in people with good diabetes control. Possible Complications 
 
 After many years, diabetes can lead to serious health problems: You could have eye problems, including trouble seeing (especially at night), and light sensitivity. You could become blind. Your feet and skin can develop sores and infections. After a long time, your foot or leg may need to be amputated. Infection can also cause pain and itching in other parts of the body. Diabetes may make it harder to control your blood pressure and cholesterol. This can lead to a heart attack, stroke, and other problems. It can become harder for blood to flow to your legs and feet. Nerves in your body can get damaged, causing pain, tingling, and numbness. Because of nerve damage, you could have problems digesting the food you eat. You could feel weakness or have trouble going to the bathroom. Nerve damage can make it harder for men to have an erection. High blood sugar and other problems can lead to kidney damage. Your kidneys may not work as well as they used to. They may even stop working so that you need dialysis or a kidney transplant. Prevention 
 
 Keeping an ideal body weight and an active lifestyle may prevent or delay the start of type 2 diabetes. Some medicines can also be used to delay or prevent the start of type 2 diabetes. At this time, type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented. But there is promising research that shows type 1 diabetes may be delayed in some high risk people. Alternative Names 
 
 Diabetes - type 1; Diabetes - type 2; Diabetes - gestational; Type 1 diabetes; Type 2 diabetes; Gestational diabetes; Diabetes mellitus Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Diabetic retinopathy 
 Islets of Langerhans 
 Pancreas 
 Insulin pump 
 Type I diabetes 
 Diabetic blood circulation in foot 
 Food and insulin release 
 Insulin production and diabetes 
 Monitoring blood glucose - Series 
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum - abdomen 
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum - leg 
 References 
 
 Polonsky KS, Burant CF. Type 2 diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 31. Standards of medical care in diabetes-2016: summary of revisions.  Diabetes Care . 2016:39 Suppl 1:S4-S5. PMID 26696680  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26696680 . Read More 
 
 Diabetes and eye disease 
 Diabetes and kidney disease 
 Diabetes and nerve damage 
 Diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome 
 Gestational diabetes 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 High blood pressure 
 Peripheral artery disease - legs 
 Stable angina 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diabetes - foot ulcers 
 Diabetes - taking care of your feet 
 Diabetes - when you are sick 
 Review Date 7/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes 
 Diabetes in Children and Teens 
 Browse the Encyclopedia