
 Diabetes type 2 - meal planning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 When you have type 2 diabetes, taking time to plan your meals goes a long way toward controlling your blood sugar and weight. Function 
 
 Your main focus is on keeping your blood sugar (glucose) level in your target range. To help manage your blood sugar, follow a meal plan that has: Food from all the food groups Fewer calories About the same amount of carbohydrates at each meal and snack Healthy fats Along with healthy eating, you can keep your blood sugar in target range by maintaining a healthy weight. Persons with type 2 diabetes are often overweight. Losing just 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) can help you manage your diabetes better. Eating healthy foods and staying active (for example, 30 to 60 minutes of walking per day) can help you meet and maintain your weight loss goal. HOW CARBOHYDRATES AFFECT BLOOD SUGAR Carbohydrates in food give your body energy. You need to eat carbohydrates to maintain your energy. But carbohydrates also raise your blood sugar higher and faster than other kinds of food. The main kinds of carbohydrates are starches, sugars, and fiber. Learn which foods have carbohydrates. This will help with meal planning so that you can keep your blood sugar in your target range. MEAL PLANNING FOR CHILDREN WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES Meal plans should consider the amount of calories children need to grow. In general, three small meals and three snacks a day can help meet calorie needs. Many children with type 2 diabetes are overweight. The goal should be a healthy weight by eating healthy foods and getting more activity (60 minutes each day). Work with a registered dietitian to design a meal plan for your child. A registered dietitian is an expert in food and nutrition. The following tips can help your child stay on track: No food is off-limits. Knowing how different foods affect your child's blood sugar helps you and your child keep it in target range. Help your child learn how much food is a healthy amount. This is called portion control. Have your family gradually switch from drinking soda and other sugary drinks, such as sports drinks and juices, to plain water or low-fat milk.  PLANNING MEALS Everyone has individual needs. Work with your doctor, registered dietitian, or diabetes educator to develop a meal plan that works for you. When shopping,  read food labels  to make better food choices. A good way to make sure you get all the nutrients you need during meals is to use the plate method. This is a visual food guide that helps you choose the best types and right amounts of food to eat. It encourages larger portions of non-starchy vegetables (half the plate) and moderate portions of protein (one quarter of the plate) and starch (one quarter of the plate). You can find more information about the plate method at the American Diabetes Association website:  www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/planning-meals/create-your-plate . EAT A VARIETY OF FOODS Eating a wide variety of foods helps you stay healthy. Try to include foods from all the food groups at each meal.  VEGETABLES (2½ to 3 cups or 450 to 550 grams a day) Choose fresh or frozen vegetables without added sauces, fats, or salt. Non-starchy vegetables include dark green and deep yellow vegetables, such as cucumber, spinach, broccoli, romaine lettuce, cabbage, chard, and bell peppers. Starchy vegetables include corn, green peas, lima beans, carrots, yams and taro. Note that potato should be considered a pure starch, like white bread or white rice, instead of a vegetable. FRUITS (1½ to 2 cups or 240 to 320 grams a day) Choose fresh, frozen, canned (without added sugar or syrup), or unsweetened dried fruits. Try apples, bananas, berries, cherries, fruit cocktail, grapes, melon, oranges, peaches, pears, papaya, pineapple, raisins. Drink juices that are 100% fruit with no added sweeteners or syrups. GRAINS (3 to 4 ounces or 85 to 115 grams a day) There are 2 types of grains: Whole grains are unprocessed and have the entire grain kernel. Examples are whole-wheat flour, oatmeal, whole cornmeal, amaranth, barley, brown and wild rice, buckwheat, and quinoa. Refined grains have been processed (milled) to remove the bran and germ. Examples are white flour, de-germed cornmeal, white bread, and white rice. Grains have starch, a type of carbohydrate. Carbohydrates raise your blood sugar level. So, for healthy eating, make sure half of the grains you eat each day are whole grains. Whole grains have lots of fiber. Fiber in the diet keeps your blood sugar level from rising too fast.  PROTEIN FOODS (5 to 6½ ounces or 140 to 184 grams a day) Protein foods include meat, poultry, seafood, eggs, beans and peas, nuts, seeds, and processed soy foods. Eat fish and poultry more often. Remove the skin from chicken and turkey. Select lean cuts of beef, veal, pork, or wild game. Trim all visible fat from meat. Bake, roast, broil, grill, or boil instead of frying. When frying proteins, use healthy oils such as olive oil. DAIRY (3 cups or 245 grams a day) Choose low-fat dairy products. Be aware that milk, yogurt, and other dairy foods have natural sugar, even when they do not contain added sugar. Take this into account when planning meals to stay in your blood sugar target range. Some non-fat dairy products have a lot of added sugar. Be sure to read the label. OILS/FATS (no more than 7 teaspoons or 35 milliliters a day) Oils are not considered a food group. But they have nutrients that help your body stay healthy. Oils are different from fats in that oils remain liquid at room temperature. Fats remain solid at room temperature. Limit your intake of fatty foods, especially those high in saturated fat, such as hamburgers, deep-fried foods, bacon, and butter.  Instead, choose foods that are high in polyunsaturated or monounsaturated fats. These include fish, nuts, and vegetable oils. Oils can raise your blood sugar, but not as fast as starch. Oils are also high in calories. Try to use no more than the recommended daily limit of 7 teaspoons (35 milliliters). WHAT ABOUT ALCOHOL AND SWEETS? If you choose to drink alcohol, limit the amount and have it with a meal. Check with your health care provider about how alcohol will affect your blood sugar and to determine a safe amount for you. Sweets are high in fat and sugar. Keep portion sizes small.  Here are tips to help avoid eating too many sweets: Ask for extra spoons and forks and split your dessert with others. Eat sweets that are sugar-free. Always ask for the smallest serving size or children's size. Alternative Names 
 
 Type 2 diabetes diet; Diet - diabetes - type 2 References 
 
 American Diabetes Association. Foundations of care: education, nutrition, physical activity, smoking cessation, psychosocial care, and immunization. Sec. 4. Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2015.  Diabetes Care . 2015;38:S20-S30. PMID: 25537706  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25537706 . Dungan KM. Management of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology : Adult and Pediatric. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 48. Ghosh S, Collier A. Initial management and education. In: Ghosh S, Collier A, eds.  Churchill's Pocketbook of Diabetes . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:section 2. 
 Review Date 7/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes in Children and Teens 
 Diabetes Type 2 
 Diabetic Diet 
 Browse the Encyclopedia