
 Diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome (HHS) is a complication of  type 2 diabetes . It involves extremely high blood sugar (glucose) level without the presence of ketones. Causes 
 
 HHS is a condition of: Extremely high blood sugar (glucose) level
   
Extreme lack of water ( dehydration )
   
Decreased alertness or consciousness (in many cases)
   Buildup of ketones in the body (ketoacidosis) may also occur. But it is unusual and is often mild compared with  diabetic ketoacidosis .  HHS is more often seen in people with type 2 diabetes who don't have their diabetes under control. It may also occur in those who have not been diagnosed with diabetes. The condition may be brought on by: 
Infection
   
Other illness, such as heart attack or stroke
   
Medicines that decrease the effect of insulin in the body
   
Medicines or conditions that increase fluid loss
   Normally, the kidneys try to make up for a high glucose level in the blood by allowing the extra glucose to leave the body in the urine. But this also causes the body to lose water. If you do not drink enough water, or you drink fluids that contain sugar and keep eating foods with carbohydrates, the kidneys may become overwhelmed. When this occurs, they are no longer able to get rid of the extra glucose. As a result, the glucose level in your blood can become very high. The loss of water also makes the blood more concentrated than normal. This is called hyperosmolarity. It is a condition in which the blood has a high concentration of salt (sodium), glucose, and other substances. This draws the water out of the body's other organs, including the brain. Risk factors include: 
A stressful event such as infection,  heart attack ,  stroke , or recent surgery
   Heart failure Impaired thirst Limited access to water (especially in people with  dementia  or who are bedbound) 
Older age
   
Poor kidney function
   
Poor management of diabetes, not following the treatment plan as directed
   
Stopping insulin or other medicines that lower glucose level
   Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Increased thirst  and urination (at the beginning of the syndrome) Feeling weak Nausea Weight loss Dry mouth, dry tongue Fever Seizures Confusion Coma Symptoms may get worse over days or weeks. Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Loss of feeling or function of muscles Problems with movement Speech impairment  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms and medical history. The exam may show that you have: Extreme dehydration Fever higher than 100.4°F (38°C) Increased  heart rate Low systolic blood pressure  Test that may be done include: Blood osmolarity (concentration) BUN  and  creatinine  levels Blood  sodium  level Ketone test Blood glucose Evaluation for possible causes may include: Blood cultures Chest x-ray Electrocardiogram  (ECG) Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 At the start of treatment, the goal is to correct the water loss. This will improve the blood pressure, urine output, and circulation. Blood sugar will also decrease. Fluids and potassium will be given through a vein ( intravenously ). This must be done carefully. High glucose level is treated with insulin given through a vein. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who develop HHS are often already ill. If not treated right away, seizures, coma, or death may result. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, HHS may lead to any of the following: Shock Blood clot formation Brain swelling (cerebral edema) Increased blood acid level ( lactic acidosis ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition is a medical emergency. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you develop symptoms of HHS. Prevention 
 
 Controlling type 2 diabetes and recognizing the early signs of dehydration and infection can help prevent HHS. Alternative Names 
 
 HHS; Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma; Nonketotic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC); Hyperosmolar nonketotic coma (HONK); Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar non-ketotic state; Diabetes - hyperosmolar Images 
 
 
 Food and insulin release 
 References 
 
 Crandall J, Shamoon H. Diabetes mellitus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 229. Graber MN. Diabetes and hyperglycemia. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 162. Lebovitz HE. Hyperglycemia secondary to nondiabetic conditions and therapies. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 42. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Blood sugar test - blood 
 Dehydration 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Lactic acidosis 
 Stroke 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Type 2 diabetes - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diabetes Complications 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia