
 Dialysis - peritoneal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dialysis treats end-stage kidney failure. It removes harmful substances from the blood when the kidneys cannot. This article focuses on peritoneal dialysis. Description 
 
 Your kidneys' main job is to remove toxins and extra fluid from your blood. If waste products build up in your body, it can be dangerous and even cause death. Kidney dialysis (peritoneal dialysis and other types of dialysis) does some of the job of the kidneys when they stop working well. This process: Removes extra salt, water, and waste products so they do not build up in your body Keeps safe levels of minerals and vitamins in your body Helps control blood pressure Helps produce red blood cells  WHAT IS PERITONEAL DIALYSIS? Peritoneal dialysis (PD) removes waste and extra fluid through the blood vessels that line the walls of your abdomen. A membrane called the peritoneum covers the walls of your abdomen.  PD involves putting a soft, hollow tube (catheter) into your abdominal cavity and filling it with a cleansing fluid (dialysis solution). The solution contains a type of sugar that draws out waste and extra fluid. The waste and fluid passes from your blood vessels through the peritoneum and into the solution. After a set amount of time, the solution and waste is drained and thrown away.  The process of filling and draining your abdomen is called an exchange. The length of time the cleansing fluid remains in your body is called the dwell time. The number of exchanges and amount of dwell time depends on the method of PD you use and other factors. Your doctor will perform surgery to place the catheter in your abdomen where it will stay. It is usually near your bellybutton. PD may be a good option if you want more independence and are able to learn to treat yourself. You will have a lot to learn and need to be responsible for your care. You and your caregivers must learn how to: Perform PD as prescribed Use the equipment Buy and keep track of supplies Prevent infection  With PD, it is important not to skip exchanges. Doing so can be dangerous to your health. Some people feel more comfortable having a health care provider handle their treatment. You and your provider can decide what is best for you. TYPES OF PERITONEAL DIALYSIS PD gives you more flexibility because you do not have to go to a dialysis center. You can have treatments:  At home At work While traveling  There are two types of PD: Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) . For this method, you fill your abdomen with fluid, then go about your daily routine until it is time to drain the fluid. You are not hooked up to anything during the dwell period, and you do not need a machine. You use gravity to drain the fluid. The dwell time is usually about 4 to 6 hours, and you will need 3 to 4 exchanges each day. You will have a longer dwell time at night while you sleep. Continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis (CCPD) . With CCPD, you are connected to a machine that cycles through 3 to 5 exchanges at night while you sleep. You must be attached to the machine for 10 to 12 hours during this time. In the morning, you begin an exchange with a dwell time that lasts all day long. This allows you more time during the day without having to do exchanges.  The method you use depends on your:  Preferences Lifestyle Medical condition  You can also use some combination of the two methods. Your provider will help you find the method that works best for you. Your provider will monitor you to make sure the exchanges are removing enough waste products. You will also be tested to see how much sugar your body absorbs from the cleansing fluid. Depending on the results, you may need to make certain adjustments: To do more exchanges per day To use more cleansing fluid at each exchange To decrease the dwell time so you absorb less sugar  WHEN TO START DIALYSIS Kidney failure is the last stage of chronic kidney disease. This is when your kidneys can no longer support your body's needs. Your doctor will discuss dialysis with you before you need it. Usually you will go on dialysis when you have only 10 to 15% of your kidney function left. Risks 
 
 There is a risk for infection of the peritoneum ( peritonitis ) or the catheter site with PD. Your health care provider will show you how to clean and care for your catheter and prevent infection. Here are some tips: Wash your hands before performing an exchange or handling the catheter. Wear a surgical mask when performing an exchange. Look closely at each bag of solution to check for signs of contamination. Clean the catheter area with an antiseptic every day.  Watch the exit site for swelling, bleeding, or signs of infection. Call your provider immediately if you have a  fever  or other signs of infection. After the Procedure 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you notice: Signs of infection, such as redness, swelling, soreness, pain, warmth, or pus around the catheter Fever Nausea or vomiting Unusual color or cloudiness in used dialysis solution You are not able to pass gas or have a bowel movement  Also call your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms severely, or they last more than 2 days: Itching Trouble sleeping Diarrhea or constipation Drowsiness, confusion, or problems concentrating  References 
 
 Correa-Rotter RC, Cueto-Manzano A, Khanna R. Peritoneal Dialysis. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM. eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney , 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 65. Mitch WE. Chronic kidney disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132. Tolkoff-Rubin N. Treatment of irreversible renal failure. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 133. 
 Review Date 12/30/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dialysis 
 Kidney Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia