
 Diarrhea - overview 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diarrhea is when you pass loose or watery stool.  Considerations 
 
 In some people, diarrhea is mild and goes away in a few days. In other people, it may last longer. Diarrhea can make you feel weak and dehydrated. Diarrhea  in babies  and  children  can be serious. It needs to be treated differently than you would treat diarrhea in adults. Talk with your health care provider  if your child has diarrhea. There can be a lot to know. Your provider can help you learn how to recognize and treat  diarrhea in babies  and  in children . Causes 
 
 The most common cause of diarrhea is the stomach flu ( viral gastroenteritis ). This mild viral infection goes away on its own within a few days. Eating or drinking food or water that contains certain types of bacteria or parasites can also lead to diarrhea. This problem may be called  food poisoning . Certain medicines may also cause diarrhea , including: Some antibiotics Chemotherapy drugs for cancer Laxatives containing magnesium  Diarrhea may also be caused by medical disorders, such as: Celiac disease Inflammatory bowel diseases ( Crohn disease  and  ulcerative colitis ) Irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) Lactose intolerance  (which causes problems after drinking milk and eating other dairy products) Malabsorption syndromes Less common causes of diarrhea include: Carcinoid syndrome Disorders of the nerves that supply the intestines Removal of part of the stomach ( gastrectomy ) or small intestine Radiation therapy  People who travel to third-world or developing countries can get diarrhea from unclean water or food that isn't handled safely. Plan ahead by learning the risks and  treatment for traveler's diarrhea  before your trip. Home Care 
 
 Most times, you can  treat diarrhea  at home. You will need to learn: To drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration (when your body does not have the proper amount of water and fluids) Which foods you should or should not eat What to do if you are breastfeeding What danger signs to watch out for  Avoid medicines for diarrhea that you can buy without a prescription, unless your doctor tells you to use them. These drugs can make some infections worse. If you have a long-term form of diarrhea, such as diarrhea caused by irritable bowel syndrome,  changes to your diet and lifestyle  may help.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you or your child shows signs of dehydration: Decreased urine (fewer wet diapers in infants) Dizziness or light-headedness Dry mouth Sunken eyes Few tears when crying  Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have: Blood or pus in your stools Black stools Stomach pain that does not go away after a bowel movement Diarrhea with a fever above 101°F (100.4°F in children) Recently traveled to a foreign country and developed diarrhea  Also call your doctor if: The diarrhea gets worse or does not get better in 2 days for an infant or child, or 5 days for adults A child over 3 months old has been vomiting for more than 12 hours; in younger babies, call as soon as vomiting or diarrhea begins  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your doctor will perform a physical exam and ask you questions about your medical history and symptoms. Lab tests may be done on your stools to determine the cause of your diarrhea.  This is also a good time to ask your doctor any  questions you have about diarrhea . Over-the-counter supplements that contain healthy bacteria may help prevent diarrhea caused by taking antibiotics. These are called probiotics. Yogurt with active or live cultures is also a good source of these healthy bacteria. The following healthy steps can help you prevent illnesses that cause diarrhea: Wash your hands often, especially after going to the bathroom and before eating. Use alcohol-based hand gel frequently. Teach children to not put objects in their mouth. Take steps to avoid food poisoning . When traveling to underdeveloped areas, follow the steps below to avoid diarrhea: Drink only bottled water and do not use ice, unless it is made from bottled or purified water. Do NOT eat uncooked vegetables or fruits that do not have peels. Do NOT eat raw shellfish or undercooked meat. Do NOT consume dairy products.  Alternative Names 
 
 Stools - watery; Frequent bowel movements; Loose bowel movements Images 
 
 
 Campylobacter jejuni organism 
 Digestive system 
 Cryptosporidium, organism 
 Diarrhea 
 References 
 
 Schiller RL, Sellin JH. Diarrhea. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 15. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 142. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diarrhea - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Diarrhea - what to ask your health care provider  - adult 
 Diet - clear liquid 
 Diet - full liquid 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 12/19/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diarrhea 
 Browse the Encyclopedia