
 Diskectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diskectomy is surgery to remove all or part of the cushion that helps support part of your spinal column. These cushions are called disks, and they separate your spinal bones (vertebrae). Description 
 
 A surgeon may perform disk removal (diskectomy) in these different ways. Microdiskectomy: When you have a microdiskectomy, the surgeon does not need to do much surgery on the bones, joints, ligaments, or muscles of your spine. Diskectomy in the lower part of your back (lumbar spine) may be part of a larger surgery that also includes a  laminectomy ,  foraminotomy , or  spinal fusion . Diskectomy in your neck (cervical spine) is most often done along with laminectomy, foraminotomy, or fusion.  Microdiskectomy is done in a hospital or outpatient surgical center. You will be given spinal anesthesia (to numb your spine area) or general anesthesia (asleep and pain-free). The surgeon makes a small (1 to 1.5-inch or 2.5 to 3.8-centimeter) incision (cut) on your back and moves the back muscles away from your spine. The surgeon uses a special microscope to see the problem disk or disks and nerves during surgery. The nerve root is located and gently moved away. The surgeon removes the injured disk tissue and pieces of the disk. The back muscles are returned to place. The incision is closed with stitches or staples. The surgery takes about 1 to 2 hours.  Diskectomy and laminotomy are usually done in the hospital, using general anesthesia (asleep and pain-free). The surgeon makes a larger cut on your back over the spine. Muscles and tissue are gently moved to expose your spine. A small part of the lamina bone (part of the vertebrae that surrounds the spinal column and nerves) is cut away. The opening may be as large as the ligament that runs along your spine. A small hole is cut in the disk that is causing your symptoms. Material from inside the disk is removed. Other fragments of the disk may also be removed.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 When one of your disks moves out of place ( herniates ), the soft gel inside pushes through the wall of the disk. The disk may then place pressure on the spinal cord and nerves that are coming out of your spinal column. Many of the symptoms caused by a herniated disk get better or go away over time without surgery. Most people with low back or neck pain, numbness, or even mild weakness are often first treated with anti-inflammatory medicines, physical therapy, and exercise. Only a few people with a herniated disk need surgery. Your doctor may recommend a diskectomy if you have a herniated disk and: Leg pain or numbness that is very bad or is not going away, making it hard to do daily tasks Severe weakness in muscles of your lower leg or buttocks Pain that spreads into your buttocks or legs If you are having problems with your bowels or bladder, or the pain is so bad that strong pain drugs do not help, you will probably have surgery right away. Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding, blood clots, infection  Risks for this surgery are: Damage to the nerves that come out of the spine, causing weakness or pain that does not go away Your back pain does not get better, or pain comes back later Pain after surgery, if all the disk fragments are not removed Spinal fluid may leak The disk may bulge out again  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your doctor or nurse what medicines you are taking, even medicines, supplements or herbs you bought without a prescription. During the days before the surgery: Prepare your home for when you come back from the hospital. If you are a smoker, you need to stop. Your recovery will be slower and possibly not as good if you continue to smoke. Ask your doctor for help. Two weeks before surgery, you may be asked to stop taking medicines that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and other medicines like these. If you have  diabetes , heart disease, or other medical problems, your surgeon will ask you to see the doctors who treat you for those conditions. Talk with your doctor if you have been drinking a lot of alcohol. Ask your doctor which medicines you should still take on the day of the surgery. Always let your doctor know about any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illnesses you may have. You may want to visit the physical therapist to learn some exercises to do before surgery and to practice using crutches.  On the day of the surgery: Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take the medicines your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Bring your cane, walker, or wheelchair if you have one already. Also bring shoes with flat, nonskid soles. Follow instructions about when to arrive at the hospital. Arrive on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 Your doctor or nurse will ask you to get up and walk around as soon as your anesthesia wears off. Most people go home the day of surgery. Do NOT drive yourself home. Follow instructions about how to  care for yourself at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people have pain relief and can move better after surgery. Numbness and tingling should get better or disappear. Your pain, numbness, or weakness may not get better or go away if you had nerve damage before surgery, or if you have symptoms caused by other spinal conditions. Further changes may occur in your spine over time and new symptoms may occur. Talk with your doctor about how to prevent future back problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Spinal microdiskectomy; Microdecompression; Laminotomy; Disk removal; Spine surgery - diskectomy; Discectomy Images 
 
 
 Herniated nucleus pulposus 
 Skeletal spine 
 Spine supporting structures 
 Cauda equina 
 Spinal stenosis 
 Microdiskectomy - series 
 References 
 
 Ehni BL, Satyan K. Lumbar discectomy. In: Benzel EC, ed.  Spine Surgery . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 78. Gardocki RJ, Park AL. Lower back pain and disorders of intervertebral discs. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 42. Kreiner DS, Hwang SW; North American Spine Society, et al. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of lumbar disc herniation with radiculopathy.  Spine J . 2014;14(1):180-191. PMID: 24239490  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24239490 . Wilson AS, Samartzis D, Shen FH. Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. In: Shen FH, Samartzis D, Fessler RG, eds.  Textbook of the Cervical Spine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Foraminotomy 
 Herniated disk 
 Laminectomy 
 Low back pain - acute 
 Low back pain - chronic 
 Neck pain 
 Sciatica 
 Spinal fusion 
 Spinal stenosis 
 Taking care of your back at home 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Spine surgery - discharge 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Internal review and update on 08/05/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Herniated Disk 
 Browse the Encyclopedia