
 Disorder of written expression 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Disorder of written expression is a childhood condition that involves poor writing skills. Causes 
 
 Specific learning disorder with impairment in written expression is as common as other learning disorders, which is about 5 to 15%. This disorder appears by itself or along with other learning disabilities, such as: Developmental coordination disorder  (includes poor handwriting) Expressive language disorder Mathematics disorder Reading disorder Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Errors in grammar and punctuation Poor handwriting Poor spelling Poorly organized writing  Exams and Tests 
 
 Other causes of learning disabilities must be ruled out before the diagnosis can be confirmed. Treatment 
 
 Remedial education is the best approach to this type of disorder. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The degree of recovery depends on the severity of the disorder. Marked improvement is often seen after treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may occur include: Learning problems Low self-esteem Problems with socializing  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Parents who are concerned about their child's writing ability should have their child tested by educational professionals. Prevention 
 
 Learning disorders often run in families. Affected or potentially affected families should make every effort to recognize problems early. Intervention can begin as early as preschool or kindergarten. Alternative Names 
 
 Written expression disorder; Dysgraphia; Specific learning disorder with impairment in written expression References 
 
 Katusic SK, Colligan RC, Weaver AL, Barbaresi WJ, eds. The Forgotten Learning Disability: Epidemiology of Written-Language Disorder in a Population-Based Birth Cohort (1976-1982).  Pediatrics . May 2009; 123:5 1306-1313. Kelly DP, Natale MJ. Neurodevelopmental function and dysfunction in the school-aged child. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 29. Read More 
 
 Developmental coordination disorder 
 Developmental reading disorder 
 Mathematics disorder 
 
 Review Date 11/12/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer K. Mannheim, ARNP, Medical Staff, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Learning Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia