
 Diverticulitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Diverticula are small, bulging sacs or pouches that form on the inner wall of the intestine. Diverticulitis occurs when these pouches become inflamed or infected. Most often, these pouches are in the large intestine (colon). Causes 
 
 The formation of pouches or sacs on the intestinal lining is called diverticulosis. It is found in more than half of Americans over age 60. However, no one knows exactly what causes the pouches to form. Eating a low-fiber diet mostly made up of processed foods may be a cause. Constipation and hard stools are more likely when you do not eat enough fiber. Straining to pass stools increases the pressure in the colon or intestines, which may lead to the formation of these pouches. Diverticulitis is caused by small pieces of stool (feces) that become trapped in these pouches, causing infection or inflammation. Symptoms 
 
 People with  diverticulosis  often have no symptoms, but they may have bloating and cramping in the lower part of the belly. Rarely, they may notice blood in their stool or on toilet paper. Symptoms of diverticulitis are more severe and often start suddenly, but they may become worse over a few days. They include: Tenderness, usually in the left lower side of the abdomen Bloating or gas Fever and chills Nausea and vomiting Not feeling hungry and not eating  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. You may need blood tests to see if you have an infection. Other tests that help diagnose diverticulitis may include: CT scan Ultrasound of the abdomen X-rays of the abdomen  Treatment 
 
 The treatment of diverticulitis depends on how serious the symptoms are. Some people may need to be in the hospital, but most of the time, the problem can be treated at home. To help with the pain, your provider may suggest that you: Rest in bed and use a heating pad on your belly. Take pain medicines (ask your provider which ones you should use). Drink only fluids for a day or two, and then slowly begin drinking thicker liquids and then eating foods.  The provider may treat you with antibiotics. After you are better, your provider will suggest that you add more fiber to your diet. Eating more fiber can help prevent future attacks. If you have bloating or gas, reduce the amount of fiber you eat for a few days. Once these pouches have formed, you will have them for life. Diverticulitis can return, but some providers think a  high-fiber diet  may lessen your chances of a recurrence. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most often, this is a mild condition that responds well to treatment. Some people will have more than 1 attack of diverticulitis. Surgery may be needed in some cases. Many times, providers will recommend that you have a  colonoscopy  after diverticulitis has healed. Possible Complications 
 
 More serious problems that may develop are: Abnormal connections that form between parts of the colon or between the colon and another part of the body (fistula) Hole or tear in the colon (perforation) Narrowed area in the colon (stricture) Pocket filled with pus or infection (abscess)  Bleeding from the diverticula When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms of diverticulitis occur. Also call if you have diverticulitis and you have: Blood in your stools Fever above 100.4°F (38°C) that does not go away Nausea, vomiting, or chills Sudden belly or back pain that gets worse or is very severe  Images 
 
 
 Colonoscopy 
 Digestive system 
 References 
 
 Bhuket TP, Stollman NH. Diverticular disease of the colon. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 121. Kuemmerle JF. Inflammatory and anatomic diseases of the intestine, peritoneum, mesentery, and omentum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 142. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diverticulitis and diverticulosis - discharge 
 Diverticulitis - what to ask your doctor  
 High-fiber foods 
 Low-fiber diet 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia