
 Drug-induced hypoglycemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced  hypoglycemia  is low blood sugar that results from medication. Causes 
 
 Low blood sugar  is common in people with diabetes who are taking insulin or other medicines to control their diabetes. All of the following can cause blood sugar (glucose) levels to drop: Drinking alcohol Getting too much activity Intentionally or unintentionally overdosing on the medications used to treat diabetes Missing meals  Even when diabetes is managed very carefully, the medications used to treat diabetes can result in drug-induced hypoglycemia. The condition may also occur when someone without diabetes takes a medicine used to treat diabetes. In rare cases, non-diabetes-related medicines may cause hypoglycemia. Medications that can cause drug-induced hypoglycemia include: Bactrim (an antibiotic) Beta-blockers Haloperidol Insulin MAO inhibitors Metformin when used with sulfonylureas Pentamidine Quinidine Quinine SGLT2 inhibitors (such as dapagliflozin and empagliflozin) Sulfonylureas Thiazolidinediones (such as Actos and Avandia) Images 
 
 
 Food and insulin release 
 References 
 
 Cryer PE. Glycemic goals in diabetes: Trade-off between glycemic control and iatrogenic hypoglycemia.  Diabetes . 2014;63:2188-2195. Cryer PE. Hypoglycemia. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.  12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 34. Inzucchi SE, Sherwin RS. Type 1 diabetes mellitus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Textbook of Medicine.  24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 236. 
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Robert Hurd MD, Professor of Endocrinology and Bioethics at Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia