
 Drug-induced diarrhea 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced diarrhea is loose, watery stools that occurs when you take certain medicines. Causes 
 
 Nearly all medicines may cause diarrhea as a side effect. The drugs listed below, however, are more likely to cause diarrhea. Laxatives are meant to cause diarrhea.  They work either by drawing water into the gut or by causing the muscles of the intestines to contract. However, taking too much of a laxative can cause diarrhea that is a problem.  Antacids that have magnesium in them may also cause diarrhea or make it worse. Antibiotics also can produce diarrhea. Normally, the intestines have many different bacteria. They keep each other in balance. Antibiotics destroy some of these bacteria, which allows other types to grow too much. In some cases, antibiotics can allow a type of bacteria called  Clostridium difficile  to grow too much. This can lead to severe, watery, and often bloody diarrhea called pseudomembranous colitis.  Many other drugs may cause diarrhea: Chemotherapy medicines used to treat cancer Drugs used to treat heartburn and stomach ulcers, such as omeprazole (Prilosec), esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (AcipHex), pantoprazole (Protonix), cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac), and nizatidine (Axid) Medicines that suppress the immune system (such as mycophenolate) Nonsteroidal anti-iflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) used to treat pain and arthritis, such as ibuprofen and naproxen Metformin used to treat diabetes Some herbal teas contain senna or other "natural" laxatives that can cause diarrhea. Other vitamins, minerals, or supplements may also cause diarrhea. Prevention 
 
 To prevent diarrhea due to antibiotic use, talk to your health care provider about taking supplements containing healthy bacteria (probiotics). Some of these products may reduce the risk of diarrhea. Keep taking these supplements for a few days after you finish your antibiotics. Alternative Names 
 
 Diarrhea associated with medicines Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Schiller LR, Sellin JH. Diarrhea. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 16. Seller RH, Symons AB. Diarrhea. In: Seller RH, ed.  Differential Diagnosis of Common Complaints . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Pseudomembranous colitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diarrhea - what to ask your health care provider  - adult 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia