
 Drug-induced pulmonary disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced pulmonary disease is lung disease brought on by a bad reaction to a medicine. Causes 
 
 Many types of lung injury can result from medicines. It is usually impossible to predict who will develop lung disease from a medicine. Types of lung problems or diseases that may be caused by medicines include: Allergic reactions  -- asthma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or eosinophilic pneumonia Bleeding into the lung air sacks, called alveoli (alveolar hemorrhage) Bronchitis Damage to lung tissue ( interstitial fibrosis ) Drugs that cause the immune system to mistakenly attack and destroy healthy body tissue, such as  drug-induced lupus erythematosus Granulomatous lung disease -- a type of inflammation in the lungs Inflammation of the lung air sacs (pneumonitis or infiltration) Lung vasculitis (inflammation of lung blood vessels) Lymph node swelling Swelling and irritation (inflammation) of the chest area between the lungs ( mediastinitis ) Abnormal buildup of fluid in the lungs ( pulmonary edema ) Buildup of fluid between the layers of tissue that line the lungs and chest cavity ( pleural effusion ) Many medicines are known to cause lung disease in some people. These include: Antibiotics, such as nitrofurantoin and sulfa drugs Heart medicines, such as amiodarone Chemotherapy  drugs such as bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and methotrexate Illegal drugs Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bloody sputum Chest pain Cough Fever Shortness of breath Wheezing Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and listen to your chest and lungs with a stethoscope. Abnormal breath sounds may be heard. Tests that may be done include: Arterial blood gases Autoimmune blood tests Blood chemistry Bronchoscopy Complete blood count with  blood differential Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Lung biopsy  (in rare cases) Lung function tests Thoracentesis  (if pleural effusion is present) Treatment 
 
 The first step is to stop the medicine that is causing the problem. Other treatments depend on your specific symptoms. For example, you may need oxygen until the drug-induced lung disease improves. Anti-inflammatory medicines called steroids are most often used to quickly reverse the lung inflammation. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Acute  episodes usually go away within 48 to 72 hours after the medicine has been stopped.  Chronic  symptoms may take longer to improve. Some drug-induced lung diseases, such as pulmonary fibrosis, may never go away. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may develop include: Diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosis Hypoxemia (low blood oxygen) Respiratory failure When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Note any past reaction you have had to a medicine, so that you can avoid the medicine in the future. Wear a medical alert bracelet if you have known drug reactions. Stay away from illegal drugs to prevent drug-induced lung diseases. Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Dulohery MM, Maldonado F, Limper AH. Drug-induced pulmonary disease. Judson MA, Morgehthau AS, Baughman RP. Sarcoidosis. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 71. Read More 
 
 Allergic reactions 
 Cardiovascular 
 Chemotherapy 
 Interstitial lung disease 
 Pleural effusion 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Respiratory 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia