
 Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia is a blood disorder that occurs when a medicine triggers the body's defense (immune) system to attack its own red blood cells. This causes red blood cells to break down earlier than normal, a process called hemolysis. Causes 
 
 In some cases, a drug can cause the immune system to mistake your own red blood cells for foreign substances. The body responds by making antibodies to attack the body's own red blood cells. The antibodies attach to red blood cells and cause them to break down too early. Drugs that can cause this type of hemolytic anemia include: Cephalosporins (a class of antibiotics), most common cause Dapsone Levodopa Levofloxacin Methyldopa Nitrofurantoin Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Penicillin and its derivatives Phenazopyridine (pyridium) Quinidine  A rare form of the disorder is hemolytic anemia from a  lack of glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) . In this case, the breakdown of red blood cells is due to a certain type of stress in the cell. Drug-induced hemolytic anemia is rare in children. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following:  Dark urine Fatigue Pale skin color Rapid heart rate Shortness of breath Yellow skin color ( jaundice )  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show an enlarged spleen. You may have blood and urine tests to help diagnose this condition. Tests may include: Absolute  reticulocyte count Direct or indirect Coombs test Indirect bilirubin  levels Red blood cell count Serum haptoglobin Urine hemoglobin  Treatment 
 
 Stopping the drug that is causing the problem may relieve or control the symptoms. You may need to take a medicine called prednisone to suppress the immune response against the red blood cells. Special blood transfusions may be needed to treat severe symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is good for most people if they stop taking the drug that is causing the problem. Possible Complications 
 
 Death caused by severe anemia is rare. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider if you have symptoms of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Avoid the drug that caused this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Immune hemolytic anemia secondary to drugs; Anemia - immune hemolytic - secondary to drugs Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Jager U, Lechner K. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi, J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 44. Michel M. Autoimmune and intravascular hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 160. Price EA, Schrier SL. Extrinsic nonimmune hemolytic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi, J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia