
 Dry eye syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 You need tears to moisten the eyes and to wash away particles that have gotten in. A healthy tear film on the eye is necessary for good vision.  Dry eyes develop when the eye is unable to maintain a healthy coating of tears  Causes 
 
 Dry eye usually occurs in people who are otherwise healthy. It becomes more common with age. This can occur due to hormonal changes that make your eyes produce fewer tears.  Other common causes of dry eyes include: Dry environment or workplace (wind, air conditioning) Sun exposure Smoking or second-hand smoke exposure Cold or allergy medicines  Dry eye can also be caused by: Heat or chemical burns Previous eye surgery A rare  autoimmune disorder  in which the glands that produce tears are destroyed ( Sjögren's syndrome )  Symptoms 
 
  
 Symptoms may include: Blurred vision Burning, itching, or redness in the eye Gritty or scratchy feeling in the eye Sensitivity to light Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: Visual acuity measurement Slit lamp exam Diagnostic staining of the cornea and tear film Measurement of tear film break-up time (TBUT) Measurement of rate of tear production (Schirmer's test) Measurement of concentration of tears (osmolalilty) Treatment 
 
 The first step in treatment is artificial tears. These come as preserved (screw cap bottle) and unpreserved (twist open vial). Preserved tears are more) convenient, but some people are sensitive to preservatives. There are many brands available without a prescription. Start using the drops at least 2 to 4 times per day. If your symptoms are not better after a couple of weeks of regular use: Increase use (up to every 2 hours) Try a different brand Talk to your health care provider if you cannot find a brand that works for you  Other medical treatments may include: Fish oil 2 to 3 times per day Glasses, goggles or contact lenses that keep moisture in the eyes Medicines such as Restasis, topical corticosteroids, and oral tetracycline and doxycycline Tiny plugs placed in the tear drainage ducts to help moisture stay on the surface of the eye longer  Other helpful steps include: DO NOT smoke and avoid second-hand smoke, direct wind, and air conditioning. Use a humidifier, especially in the winter. Limit allergy and cold medicines that may dry you out and worsen your symptoms. Purposefully blink more often. Rest your eyes once in a while. Clean eyelashes regularly and apply warm compresses.  Some dry eye symptoms are due to sleeping with the eyes slightly open. Lubricating ointments work best for this problem. You should use them only in small amounts since they can blur your vision. It is best to use them before sleep. Surgery may be helpful if symptoms are because the eyelids are in an abnormal position. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with dry eye have only discomfort, and no vision loss.  Possible Complications 
 
 In severe cases, the clear covering on the eye (cornea) may be come damaged or infected. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider immediately if:  You have red or painful eyes. You have flaking, discharge, or a sore on your eye or eyelid. You have had an injury to your eye, or if you have a bulging eye or a drooping eyelid. You have joint pain, swelling, or stiffness and a dry mouth along with dry eye symptoms. Your eyes do not get better with self-care within a few days. Prevention 
 
 Stay away from dry environments and things that irritate your eyes to help prevent symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Keratitis sicca; Xerophthalmia; Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Images 
 
 
 Eye anatomy 
 References 
 
 Rao NK, Goldstein MH, Tu EY. Dry eye. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.23 Read More 
 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sjögren syndrome 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Vitamin A 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tears 
 Browse the Encyclopedia