
 Ear drainage culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An ear drainage culture is a lab test. This test checks for germs that can cause infection. The sample taken for this test can contain fluid, pus, wax, or blood from the ear. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of ear drainage is needed. Your health care provider will use a cotton swab to collect the sample from inside the outer ear canal. In some cases, a sample is collected from the middle ear during ear surgery. The sample is sent to a lab and placed on a special dish (culture media). The lab team checks the dish every day to see if bacteria, fungi, or viruses have grown. More tests may be done to look for specific germs and determine the best treatment. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You do not need to prepare for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Using a cotton swab to take a sample of drainage from the outer ear is not painful. However,  ear pain  may be present if the ear is infected. Ear surgery  is done using general anesthesia. You will be asleep and feel no pain.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test may be done if you or your child has: An ear infection that is not getting better with treatment An infection of the outer ear ( otitis externa ) An ear infection with a ruptured eardrum and draining fluid  It may also be done as a routine part of  myringotomy . Note: Ear infections are diagnosed based on symptoms rather than using a culture. Normal Results 
 
 The test is normal if there is no growth on the culture. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be a sign of an infection. The infection can be caused by bacteria, virus, or fungus. The test results may show which organism is causing the infection. It will help your provider decide on the right treatment. Risks 
 
 No risks are involved with swabbing the ear canal.  Ear surgery  may involve some risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - ear drainage Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Medical findings based on ear anatomy 
 Ear drainage culture 
 References 
 
 Bauer CA, Jenkins HA. Otologic symptoms and syndromes. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 156. Murray PR. The clinician and the microbiology laboratory. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Otitis 
 Swimmer's ear  
 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia