
 Ear discharge 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ear discharge is drainage of blood,  ear wax , pus, or fluid from the ear. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, any fluid leaking out of an ear is ear wax. A ruptured eardrum can cause a white, slightly bloody, or yellow discharge from the ear. Dry crusted material on a child's pillow is often a sign of a ruptured eardrum. The eardrum may also bleed. Causes of a ruptured eardrum include: Foreign object in the ear canal Injury from a blow to the head, foreign object, very loud noises, or sudden pressure changes (such as in airplanes) Inserting cotton-tipped swabs or other small objects into the ear Middle ear infection  Other causes of ear discharge include: Eczema  and other skin irritations in the ear canal Swimmer's ear  -- with symptoms such as itching, scaling, a red or moist ear canal, and pain that increases when you move the earlobe  Home Care 
 
 Caring for ear discharge at home depends on the cause. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: The discharge is white, yellow, clear, or bloody. The discharge is the result of an injury. The discharge has lasted more than 5 days. There is severe pain. The discharge is associated with other symptoms, such as fever or headache. There is loss of hearing. There is redness or swelling coming out of the ear canal.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and look inside the ears. You may be asked questions, such as: When did the ear drainage begin? What does it look like? How long has it lasted? Does it drain all the time or off-and-on? What other symptoms do you have (for example, fever, ear pain, headache)? The provider may take a sample of the ear drainage and send it to a lab for examination. The provider may recommend anti-inflammatory or antibiotic medicines, which are placed in the ear. Antibiotics may be given by mouth if a ruptured eardrum from an ear infection is causing the discharge. Alternative Names 
 
 Drainage from the ear; Otorrhea; Ear bleeding; Bleeding from ear Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Eardrum repair  - series 
 References 
 
 Bauer CA, Jenkins HA. Otologic symptoms and syndromes. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 156. Brant JA, Ruckenstein MJ. Infections of the external ear. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 137. Lee DJ, Roberts D. Topical therapies for external ear disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 138. O'Handley JG, Tobin EJ, Shah AR. Otorhinolaryngology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Earache 
 Ear wax 
 Ruptured eardrum 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ear tube surgery - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 5/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi, MD, specialist in laryngology, Assistant Clinical Professor, UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Disorders 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia