
 Earache 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An earache is a sharp, dull, or burning pain in one or both ears. The pain may last a short time or be ongoing. Related conditions include: Otitis media Swimmer's ear Malignant otitis externa Considerations 
 
 The symptoms of an ear infection may include: Ear pain Fever Fussiness Increased crying Irritability  Many children will have minor hearing loss during or right after an ear infection. Most of the time the problem goes away. Lasting hearing loss is rare, but the risk increases with the number of infections. Causes 
 
 The eustachian tube runs from the middle part of each ear to the back of the throat. This tube drains fluid that is made in the middle ear. If the eustachian tube becomes blocked, fluid can build up. This may lead to pressure behind the eardrum or an  ear infection . Ear pain in adults is less likely to be from an ear infection. Pain that you feel in the ear may be coming from another place, such as your teeth, the joint in your jaw ( temporomandibular joint ), or your throat. This is called "referred" pain. Causes of ear pain may include: Arthritis  of the jaw Short-term ear infection Long-term ear infection Ear injury from pressure changes  (from high altitudes and other causes) Object stuck in the ear  or buildup of ear wax Hole in the eardrum Sinus infection Sore throat Temporomandibular joint syndrome  (TMJ) Tooth infection Ear pain in a child or infant may be due to infection. Other causes may include: Ear canal irritation from cotton-tipped swabs Soap or shampoo staying in the ear  Home Care 
 
 The following steps may help an earache: Place a cold pack or cold wet washcloth on the outer ear for 20 minutes to reduce pain. Chewing may help relieve the pain and pressure of an ear infection. (Gum can be a choking hazard for young children.) Resting in an upright position instead of lying down can reduce pressure in the middle ear. Over-the-counter ear drops can be used to relieve pain, as long as the eardrum has not ruptured. Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, can provide relief for children and adults with an earache. (DO NOT give aspirin to children.)  For  ear pain caused by a change of altitude , such as on an airplane: Swallow or chew gum as the plane descends. Allow infants to suck on a bottle or breastfeed.  The following steps can help prevent earaches: Avoid smoking near children. Secondhand smoke is a major cause of ear infections in children. Prevent outer ear infections by not putting objects in the ear. Dry the ears well after bathing or swimming. Take steps to control allergies. Try to avoid allergy triggers. Try a steroid nasal spray to help reduce ear infections. (However, over-the-counter antihistamines and decongestants DO NOT prevent ear infections.)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your child has a high fever, severe pain, or seems sicker than is usual for an ear infection. Your child has new symptoms such as dizziness, headache, swelling around the ear, or weakness in the face muscles. Severe pain suddenly stops (this may be a sign of a ruptured eardrum). Symptoms (pain, fever, or irritability) get worse or do not improve within 24 to 48 hours.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a  physical exam  and look at the ear, nose, and throat areas. Pain, tenderness, or redness of the mastoid bone behind the ear on the skull is often a sign of a serious infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Otalgia; Pain - ear; Ear pain Images 
 
 
 Ear anatomy 
 Medical findings based on ear anatomy 
 References 
 
 Bauer CA, Jenkins HA. Otologic symptoms and syndromes. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 156. Coker TR, Chan LS, Newberry SJ, et al. Diagnosis, microbial epidemiology, and antibiotic treatment of acute otitis media in children: a systematic review.  JAMA . 2010;304(19):2161-2169. PMID: 21081729  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21081729 .  Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media.  Pediatrics . 2013;131(3): e964-e999. PMID: 23439909  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23439909 .  O'Handley JG, Tobin EJ, Shah AR. Otorhinolaryngology In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Fever 
 Hearing loss 
 Otitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ear tube surgery - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ear Disorders 
 Ear Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia