
 Echinococcosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Echinococcosis is an infection caused by either the  Echinococcus granulosus  or  Echinococcus multilocularis  tapeworm. The infection is also called hydatid disease. Causes 
 
 Humans become infected when they swallow the tapeworm eggs in contaminated food. The eggs then form cysts inside the body. A cyst is a closed pocket or pouch. The cysts keep growing, which leads to symptoms. E granulosus  is an infection caused by tapeworms found in dogs, and livestock such as sheep, pigs, goats, and cattle. These tapeworms are around 2 to 7 mm long. The infection is called cystic echinococcosis (CE). It leads to growth of cysts mainly in the lungs and liver. Cysts can also be found in the heart, bones, and brain. E multilocularis  is the infection caused by tapeworms found in dogs, cats, rodents, and foxes. These tapeworms are around 1 to 4 mm long. The infection is called alveolar echinococcosis (AE). It is a life-threatening condition because tumor-like growths form in the liver. Other organs, such as the lungs and brain can be affected. Children or young adults are more prone to get the infection. Echinococcosis is common in: Africa Central Asia Southern South America The Mediterranean The Middle East In rare cases, the infection is seen in the United States. It has been reported in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. Risk factors include being exposed to: Cattle Deer Feces of dogs, foxes, wolves, or coyotes Pigs Sheep Camels Symptoms 
 
 Cysts may produce no symptoms for 10 years or more. As the disease advances and the cysts get larger, symptoms may include: Pain in the upper right part of the abdomen (liver cyst) Increase in size of the abdomen due to swelling (liver cyst) Bloody sputum  (lung cyst) Chest pain  (lung cyst) Cough  (lung cyst) Severe allergic reaction ( anaphylaxis ) when cysts break open Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a  physical exam  and ask about the symptoms. If the provider suspects CE or AE, tests that may be done to find the cysts include: X-ray, CT scan, or ultrasound to view the cysts Blood tests, such as enzyme-linked immunoassay ( ELISA ),  liver function tests Most often, echinococcosis cysts are found when an imaging test is done for another reason. Treatment 
 
 Many people can be treated with anti-worm medicines. A procedure that involves inserting a needle through the skin into the cyst may be tried. The contents of the cyst is removed ( aspirated ) through the needle. Then medicine is sent through the needle to kill the tapeworm. The cysts may be removed with surgery, if possible. But this can be a complicated surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the cysts respond to oral medicines, the likely outcome is good. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Measures to prevent CE and AE include: Staying away from wild animals including foxes, wolves, and coyotes Avoiding contact with stray dogs Washing hands well after touching pet dogs or cats, and before handling food Alternative Names 
 
 Hydatidosis; Hydatid disease, Hydatid cyst disease; Alveolar cyst disease Images 
 
 
 Liver echinococcus - CT scan 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Fischer PR, Cabada MM, White AC. Echinococcosis ( Echinococcus granulosus  and  Echinococcus multilocularis ). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 304. King CH, Fairley JK. Tapeworms (Cestodes). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 291. Parasites-echinococcosis. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention Web site. Updated December 12, 2012.  www.cdc.gov/parasites/echinococcosis/treatment.html . Accessed October 06, 2016. White AC, Fischer PR, Legua P. Cestodes. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 226. Read More 
 
 Cyst 
 Physical examination 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia