
 ECHO virus  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Enteric cytopathic human orphan (ECHO) viruses are a group of viruses that lead to  gastrointestinal infection  and skin rashes. Causes 
 
 Echovirus is one of several families of viruses that affect the gastrointestinal tract. Together, these are called "enteroviruses." These infections are common. In the United States, they are most common in the summer and fall. You can catch the virus if you come into contact with stool contaminated by the virus, and possibly by breathing in air particles from an infected person. Serious infections with ECHO viruses are less common, but can be significant. For example, up to 1 in 5 cases of viral meningitis (inflammation of the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord) is caused by an ECHO virus. Symptoms 
 
 You may not have any symptoms. Symptoms depend on the site of infection and may include: Croup  (breathing difficulty and harsh cough) Mouth sores Skin rashes Sore throat  Exams and Tests 
 
 Because the illness is often mild and has no specific treatment, testing for echovirus is often not done. ECHO virus can be identified from: Rectal culture Spinal fluid culture Stool culture Throat culture Treatment 
 
 ECHO virus infections almost always clear up on their own. No specific medicines are available to fight the virus. Immune system treatment called IVIG may help people with severe ECHO virus infections who have a weakened immune system. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who have the less severe types of illness should recover completely without treatment. Infections of organs such as the heart may cause severe disease and can be deadly. Possible Complications 
 
 ECHO viruses may cause these complications: Brain infection Meningitis Inflammation of the heart muscle or heart lining Pneumonia Upper respiratory infection  Complications vary with the site and type of infection. Heart infections may be deadly, while most other types of infection improve on their own.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any of the symptoms listed above. Prevention 
 
 No specific preventive measures are available for ECHO virus infections other than hand-washing, especially when you are in contact with sick people. Currently, no vaccines are available. Alternative Names 
 
 Nonpolio enterovirus infection; Echovirus infection Images 
 
 
 ECHO virus type 9 exanthem 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Romero JR. Enteroviruses. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 387. Romero JR, Modlin JF. Introduction to the human enteroviruses and parechoviruses. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 172. Read More 
 
 Bacterial gastroenteritis 
 Rashes 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Viral Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia