
 Ectodermal dysplasia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ectodermal dysplasia is a group of conditions in which there is abnormal development of the skin, hair, nails, teeth, or sweat glands. Causes 
 
 There are many different types of ectodermal dysplasia. Many gene defects can cause ectodermal dysplasias. The most common form of ectodermal dysplasia usually affects men. Other forms of the disease affect men and women equally. Symptoms 
 
 People with ectodermal dysplasia may not sweat or may have decreased sweating because of a lack of sweat glands. In children with the disease, their bodies may have a problem controlling fevers. Even a mild illness can produce an extremely high fever, because the skin cannot sweat and control temperature properly. Affected adults are unable to tolerate a warm environment and need special measures to keep a normal body temperature. Other symptoms include: Abnormal nails Abnormal or missing teeth, or fewer than normal number of teeth Decreased skin color (pigment), or this skin Large forehead Low nasal bridge Thin, sparse hair Learning disabilities Poor hearing Poor vision with decreased tear production Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Biopsy  of the  mucus membranes Biopsy of the skin Genetic testing (available for some types of this disorder) X-rays of the teeth or bones may be done Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for this disorder. Instead, symptoms are treated as needed. Some things you can do include: Wear a wig and dentures to improve appearance. Use artificial tears to replace normal tearing and prevent drying of the eyes. Spray the nostrils with saline nose spray often to remove debris and prevent infection. Take cooling water baths or use water sprays to keep a normal body temperature (water evaporating from the skin replaces the cooling function of sweat evaporating from the skin). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Having ectodermal dysplasia will not shorten your lifespan, but you must pay constant attention to temperature regulation and other problems associated with this condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems from this condition may include: Brain damage caused by increased body temperature Seizures caused by high fever ( febrile seizures ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if your child shows symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 If you have a family history of ectodermal dysplasia and you are planning to have children, genetic counseling is recommended. In many cases it is possible to diagnose ectodermal dysplasia while the baby is still in the womb. Alternative Names 
 
 Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia; Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndrome Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Grange DK. Ectodermal dysplasias. Rimoin D, Korf B, eds. In:  Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 148. Martin KL. Ectodermal dysplasias. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Shor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 649. Read More 
 
 Body temperature norms 
 Chronic 
 Febrile seizures 
 Respiratory 
 Sweating 
 Sweating - absent 
 
 Review Date 7/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia