
 Ectropion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ectropion is the turning out of the eyelid so that the inner surface is exposed. It most often affects the lower eyelid.  Causes 
 
 Ectropion is very often caused by the aging process. The connective (supporting) tissue of the eyelid becomes weak. This causes the lid to turn out so that the side of the lower lid is no longer against the eyeball. It can also be caused by: A defect that occurs before birth (for example, in children with  Down syndrome ) Facial palsy Scar tissue from burns Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Dry, painful eyes Excess  tearing of the eye  ( epiphora ) Eyelid turns outward (downward) Long-term (chronic)  conjunctivitis Keratitis Redness of the lid and white part of the eye  If you have ectropion, you will most likely have excess tearing. This happens because the eye gets dry, then makes more tears. The excess tears can't get into the tear drainage duct. Therefore, they build up inside the lower lid and then spill over the edge of the lid onto the cheek. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will make a diagnosis by doing an exam of the eyes and eyelids. Special tests are not needed most of the time. Treatment 
 
 Artificial tears (a lubricant) may ease dryness and keep the cornea moist. Ointment may be helpful when the eye can't close all of the way, such as when you are asleep. Surgery is very often effective. The surgeon will tighten the muscles that hold the eyelids in place. It may be done as outpatient surgery setting. A medicine is used to numb the area (local anesthesia) before the surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome very often good with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Corneal dryness and irritation may lead to: Corneal abrasions Corneal ulcers Eye infections Corneal ulcers can cause vision loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of ectropion. If you have ectropion, get emergency medical help if you have:  Vision that is getting worse Pain Sensitivity to light Eye redness that is getting worse quickly Prevention 
 
 Most cases are cannot be prevented. You may use artificial tears or ointments to prevent injury to the cornea.   Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Belliveau MJ, Vargason CW, Burkat CN, Marcet MM, Belliveau MJ, Goel S. Ectropion. American Academy of Ophthalmology Web site. Updated November 17, 2015.  eyewiki.aao.org/Ectropion#Etiology . Accessed September 8, 2016. Cahill KV, Doxanas MT. Eyelid abnormalities: ectropion, entropion, trichiasis. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 5, chap 73. Robinson FO, Richard J, Collin O. Ectropion. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12.7. Yanoff M, Cameron DL. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 431. Read More 
 
 Bell palsy 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 Corneal injury 
 Corneal ulcers and infections 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia