
 Ehrlichiosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ehrlichiosis is a bacterial infection transmitted by the bite of a tick. Causes 
 
 Ehrlichiosis is caused by bacteria that belong to the family called Rickettsiae. Rickettsial bacteria cause a number of serious diseases worldwide, including  Rocky Mountain spotted fever  and  typhus . All of these diseases are spread to humans by a  tick , flea, or mite bite. Scientists first described ehrlichiosis in 1990. There are 2 types of the disease in the United States: Human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME) is caused by the rickettsial bacteria  Ehrlichia chaffeensis. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE) is also called human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA). It is caused by the rickettsial bacteria called  Anaplasma phagocytophilum . Ehrlichia bacteria can be carried by the: American dog tick Deer tick ( Ixodes scapularis ), which can also cause  Lyme disease Lone Star tick In the United States, HME is found mainly in the southern central states and the Southeast. HGE is found mainly in the Northeast and upper Midwest. Risk factors for ehrlichiosis include: Living near an area with a lot of ticks Owning a pet that may bring a tick home Walking or playing in high grasses Symptoms 
 
 The incubation period between the tick bite and when symptoms occur is about 7 to 14 days. Symptoms may seem like the flu (influenza), and may include: Chills Fever Headache Muscle aches Nausea Other possible symptoms: Diarrhea Fine pinhead-sized areas of bleeding into the skin (petechial rash) Flat red  rash  (maculopapular rash), which is uncommon General ill feeling ( malaise )  A rash appears in fewer than one-third of cases. Sometimes, the disease may be mistaken for Rocky Mountain spotted fever. The symptoms are often mild, but people are sometimes sick enough to see a health care provider. Exams and Tests 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam and check your vital signs, including: Blood pressure Heart rate Temperature Other tests include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Granulocyte  stain Indirect fluorescent  antibody  test Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of blood sample Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics (tetracycline or doxycycline) are used to treat the disease. Children should not take tetracycline by mouth until after all their permanent teeth have grown in, because it can permanently change the color of growing teeth. Doxycycline that is used for 2 weeks or less usually does not discolor a child's permanent teeth. Rifampin has also been used in people who cannot tolerate doxycycline. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Ehrlichiosis is rarely deadly. With antibiotics, people usually improve within 24 to 48 hours. Recovery takes 3 weeks. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, this infection may lead to: Coma Death (rare) Kidney damage Lung damage Other organ damage Seizure In rare cases, a tick bite can lead to more than 1 infection (co-infection). This is because ticks can carry more than 1 type of organism. Two such infections are: Lyme disease Babesiosis, a parasitic disease similar to  malaria When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you become sick after a recent tick bite or if you have been in areas where ticks are common. Be sure to tell your provider about the tick exposure. Prevention 
 
 Ehrlichiosis is spread by tick bites. Measures should be taken to prevent tick bites, including: Wear long pants and long sleeves when walking through heavy brush, tall grass, and thickly wooded areas. Pull your socks over the outside of pants to prevent ticks from crawling up your leg. Keep your shirt tucked into your pants. Wear light-colored clothes so that ticks can be spotted easily. Spray your clothes with insect repellent. Check your clothes and skin often while in the woods. After returning home: Remove your clothes. Look closely at all skin surfaces, including scalp. Ticks can quickly climb up the length of body. Some ticks are large and easy to locate. Other ticks can be quite small, so carefully look at all black or brown spots on the skin. If possible, ask someone to help you examine your body for ticks. An adult should examine children carefully. Studies suggest that a tick must be attached to your body for at least 24 hours to cause disease. Early removal may prevent infection. If you are bitten by a tick, write down the date and time the bite happened. Bring this information, along with the tick (if possible), to your provider if you become sick. Alternative Names 
 
 Human monocytic ehrlichiosis; HME; Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis; HGE; Human granulocytic anaplasmosis; HGA Images 
 
 
 Ehrlichiosis 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Angelakis E, Raoult D. Bartonellosis, cat-scratch disease, trench fever, human ehrlichiosis. In: Farrar J, Hotez PJ, Junghanss T, Kang G, Lalloo D, White NJ, eds.  Manson's Tropical Diseases . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 30. Dumler JS, Walker DH.  Ehrlichia chaffeensis  (human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis),  Anaplasma phagocytophilum  (human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis), and other anaplasmataceae. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 194. Read More 
 
 Fever 
 Lyme disease 
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
 Tick bite 
 Typhus 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia