
 Electrolytes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Electrolytes are minerals in your blood and other body fluids that carry an electric charge. Electrolytes affect how your body functions in many ways, including: The amount of water in your body The acidity of your blood (pH) Your muscle function Other important processes You lose electrolytes when you sweat. You must replace them by drinking fluids that contain electrolytes. Water does not contain electrolytes. Common electrolytes include: Calcium Chloride Magnesium Phosphorus Potassium Sodium Electrolytes can be acids, bases, or salts. They can be measured by different blood tests. Each electrolyte can be measured separately, such as: Ionized calcium Serum calcium Serum chloride Serum magnesium Serum phosphorus Serum potassium Serum sodium Note: Serum is the part of blood that doesn't contain cells. Sodium, potassium, and chloride levels can also be measured as part of a  basic metabolic panel . A more complete test, called comprehensive metabolic panel, can test for these several more electrolytes. The  electrolytes - urine test  measures electrolytes in urine. It test the levels of calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium, and other electrolytes. References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Electrolytes panel - blood. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:464-467. DuBose TD. Disorders of acid-base balance. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philiadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap16. Read More 
 
 Calcium blood test 
 Calcium - ionized 
 Chloride test - blood 
 Ions 
 Magnesium blood test 
 Phosphorus blood test 
 Radioactive iodine uptake 
 Sodium blood test 
 Sweat electrolytes test 
 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
 Browse the Encyclopedia