
 Electrocardiogram 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a test that records the electrical activity of the heart.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to lie down. The health care provider will clean several areas on your arms, legs, and chest, and then will attach small patches called electrodes to those areas. It may be necessary to shave or clip some hair so the patches stick to the skin. The number of patches used may vary. The patches are connected by wires to a machine that turns the heart's electrical signals into wavy lines, which are often printed on paper. The doctor reviews the test results. You will need to remain still during the procedure. The provider may also ask you to hold your breath for a few seconds as the test is being done.  It is important to be relaxed and warm during an ECG recording because any movement, including shivering, can alter the results.  Sometimes this test is done while you are exercising or under light stress to look for changes in the heart. This type of ECG is often called a stress test. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Make sure your provider knows about all the medicines you are taking. Some drugs can interfere with test results. DO NOT exercise or drink cold water immediately before an ECG because these actions may cause false results. How the Test will Feel 
 
 An ECG is painless. No electricity is sent through the body. The electrodes may feel cold when first applied. In rare cases, some people may develop a rash or irritation where the patches were placed. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 An ECG is used to measure: Any damage to the heart How fast your heart is beating and whether it is beating normally The effects of drugs or devices used to control the heart (such as a pacemaker) The size and position of your heart chambers  An ECG is often the first test done to determine whether a person has heart disease. Your provider may order this test if: You have  chest pain  or  palpitations You are scheduled for surgery You have had heart problems in the past You have a strong history of heart disease in the family  Normal Results 
 
 Normal test results include: Heart rate: 60 to 100 beats per minute Heart rhythm: Consistent and even  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal ECG results may be a sign of: Damage or changes to the heart muscle Changes in the amount of the electrolytes (such as potassium and calcium) in the blood Congenital heart defect Enlargement of the heart Fluid or swelling in the sac around the heart Inflammation of the heart  (myocarditis) Past or current  heart attack Poor blood supply to the heart arteries Abnormal heart rhythms ( arrhythmias )  Some heart problems that can lead to changes on an ECG test include: Atrial fibrillation/flutter Heart failure Multifocal atrial tachycardia Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia Sick sinus syndrome Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome Risks 
 
 There are no risks.  Considerations 
 
 The accuracy of the ECG depends on the condition being tested. A heart problem may not always show up on the ECG. Some heart conditions never produce any specific ECG changes. Alternative Names 
 
 ECG; EKG Images 
 
 
 ECG 
 Atrioventricular block,  ECG tracing 
 High blood pressure tests 
 Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
 ECG electrode placement 
 References 
 
 Ganz L. Electrocardiography. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 54. Mirvis DM, Goldberger AL. Electrocardiography. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Anorexia 
 Aortic dissection 
 Aortic insufficiency 
 Aortic stenosis 
 Arrhythmias 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Atrial septal defect (ASD) 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Chest pain 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Coronary artery spasm 
 Delirium tremens 
 Digitalis toxicity 
 Dilated cardiomyopathy 
 Drug-induced lupus erythematosus 
 Ectopic heartbeat 
 Electrolytes 
 Exercise stress test 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Heart palpitations 
 High potassium level 
 Holter monitor (24h) 
 Hyperaldosteronism - primary and secondary 
 Hypertensive heart disease 
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Mitral stenosis 
 Mitral valve prolapse 
 Mitral valve regurgitation 
 Multifocal atrial tachycardia 
 Myocarditis 
 Narcolepsy 
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) 
 Patent ductus arteriosus 
 Pericarditis 
 Pericarditis - after heart attack 
 Pericarditis - constrictive 
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Pulmonary valve stenosis 
 Pulse - bounding 
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy 
 Sick sinus syndrome 
 Stable angina 
 Stroke 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis 
 Transient ischemic attack 
 Transposition of the great vessels 
 Tricuspid regurgitation 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 Unstable angina 
 Ventricular septal defect 
 Ventricular tachycardia 
 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW) 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Angina 
 Arrhythmia 
 Atrial Fibrillation 
 Cardiac Rehabilitation 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Heart Diseases 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Kawasaki Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia