
 Encephalitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Encephalitis is irritation and swelling (inflammation) of the brain, most often due to infections. Causes 
 
 Encephalitis is a rare condition. It occurs more often in the first year of life and decreases with age. The very young and older adults are more likely to have a severe case. Encephalitis is most often caused by a virus. Many types of viruses may cause it. Exposure can occur through: Breathing in droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat from an infected person 
 Contaminated food or drink
  
 Mosquito, tick, and other insect bites
  
 Skin contact
  Different viruses occur in different locations. Many cases occur during a certain season. Encephalitis caused by the herpes simplex virus is the leading cause of more severe cases in all ages, including newborns. Routine vaccination has greatly reduced encephalitis due to some viruses, including: Measles Mumps Polio Rabies Rubella Varicella  (chickenpox)
  Other viruses that cause encephalitis include: 
 Adenovirus
  
 Coxsackievirus
  Cytomegalovirus 
Eastern equine encephalitis virus
  
 Echovirus
  
 Japanese encephalitis, which occurs in Asia
  West Nile virus After the virus enters the body, the brain tissue swells. This swelling may destroy nerve cells, and cause bleeding in the brain and brain damage. Other causes of encephalitis may include: An allergic reaction to vaccinations
  
 Autoimmune disease
  
 Bacteria such as  Lyme disease , syphilis, and tuberculosis
  
 Parasites such as roundworms,  cysticercosis , and  toxoplasmosis  in people with HIV/AIDS and other people who have a weakened immune system
  The effects of cancer  Symptoms 
 
 Some people may have symptoms of a cold or stomach infection before encephalitis symptoms begin. When this infection is not very severe, the symptoms may be similar to those of other illnesses:  
 Fever that is not very high Mild headache Low energy and a poor appetite Other symptoms include:  
 Clumsiness, unsteady gait 
   
 Confusion, disorientation  
 Drowsiness 
  Irritability or poor temper control Light sensitivity Stiff neck and back (sometimes) Vomiting  Symptoms in newborns and younger infants may not be as easy to recognize: Body stiffness Irritability and crying more often (these symptoms may get worse when the baby is picked up) Poor feeding Soft spot on the top of the head may bulge out more Vomiting Emergency symptoms:  
 Loss of consciousness, poor responsiveness, stupor, coma  
 Muscle weakness or paralysis 
  Seizures Severe headache Sudden change in mental functions, such a flat mood, impaired judgment, memory loss, or a lack of interest in daily activities  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms. Tests that may be done include:  Brain MRI CT scan of the head Culture of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood, or urine (however, this test is rarely useful) Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) Lumbar puncture  and  CSF examination Tests that detect antibodies to a virus (serology tests) Test that detects tiny amounts of virus DNA (polymerase chain reaction -- PCR) Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to provide supportive care (rest, nutrition, fluids) to help the body fight the infection, and to relieve symptoms.  Medicines may include: Antiviral medicines, if a virus caused the infection Antibiotics, if bacteria is the cause Antiseizure medicines to prevent  seizures Steroids to reduce brain swelling  Sedatives for irritability or restlessness Acetaminophen for fever and headache If brain function is severely affected, physical therapy and speech therapy may be needed after the infection is controlled. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome varies. Some cases are mild and short, and the person fully recovers. Other cases are severe, and permanent problems or death is possible. The  acute  phase normally lasts for 1 to 2 weeks. Fever and symptoms gradually or suddenly disappear. Some people may take several months to fully recover. Possible Complications 
 
 Permanent brain damage may occur in severe cases of encephalitis. It can affect: Hearing Memory Muscle control Sensation Speech Vision  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have: Sudden fever Other symptoms of encephalitis Prevention 
 
 Children and adults should avoid contact with anyone who has encephalitis. Controlling mosquitoes (a mosquito bite can transmit some viruses) may reduce the chance of some infections that can lead to encephalitis. Apply an insect repellant containing the chemical, DEET when you go outside (but DO NOT use DEET products on infants younger than 2 months). Remove any sources of standing water (such as old tires, cans, gutters, and wading pools). Wear long-sleeved shirts and pants when outside, especially at dusk. Children and adults should get routine vaccinations for viruses that can cause encephalitis. People should receive specific vaccines if they are traveling to places such as parts of Asia, where Japanese encephalitis is found. Vaccinate animals to prevent encephalitis caused by the rabies virus. References 
 
 Aksamit AJ. Acute viral encephalitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 414. Beckham JD, Tyler KL. Encephalitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 91. Read More 
 
 Chickenpox 
 Measles 
 Meningitis 
 Mumps 
 Rabies 
 Rubella 
 Shingles 
 Tick bite 
 Vaccines (immunizations) - overview 
 West Nile virus 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Ventriculoperitoneal shunt - discharge 
 Review Date 8/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Encephalitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia