
 End-stage kidney disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 End-stage kidney disease is the last stage of chronic kidney disease. This is when your kidneys can no longer support your body's needs. End-stage kidney disease is also called end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Causes 
 
 The kidneys remove waste and excess water from the body. ESRD occurs when the  kidneys  are no longer able to work at a level needed for day-to-day life. The most common causes of ESRD in the United States are  diabetes  and  high blood pressure . These conditions can affect your kidneys. ESRD almost always comes after  chronic kidney disease . The kidneys may slowly stop working over 10 to 20 years before end-stage disease results. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms may include: General ill feeling  and  fatigue Itching ( pruritus ) and dry skin Headache Weight loss without trying Loss of appetite Nausea Other symptoms may include: Abnormally dark or light skin Nail changes Bone pain Drowsiness  and  confusion Problems concentrating or thinking Numbness in the hands, feet, or other areas Muscle twitching  or cramps Breath odor Easy bruising, nosebleeds, or blood in the stool Excessive thirst Frequent  hiccups Problems with sexual function Menstrual periods stop (amenorrhea) Sleep problems Swelling of the feet and hands ( edema ) Vomiting , often in the morning  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and order blood tests. Most people with this condition have high blood pressure. People with ESRD will make much less urine, or their kidneys no longer make urine. ESRD changes the results of many tests. People receiving dialysis will need these and other tests done often: Potassium Sodium Albumin Phosphorous Calcium Cholesterol Magnesium Complete blood count  (CBC) Electrolytes This disease may also change the results of the following tests: Erythropoietin Parathyroid hormone Bone density test Treatment 
 
 ESRD may need to be treated with  dialysis  or  kidney transplant . You may need to stay on a special diet or take medicines to help your body work well. DIALYSIS Dialysis does some of the job of the kidneys when they stop working well. Dialysis can: Remove extra salt, water, and waste products so they do not build up in your body Keep safe levels of minerals and vitamins in your body Help control blood pressure Help the body make red blood cells  Your provider will discuss dialysis with you before you need it. Dialysis removes waste from your blood when your kidneys can no longer do their job. Usually, you will go on dialysis when you have only 10% to 15% of your kidney function left. Even people who are waiting for a kidney transplant may need dialysis while waiting.  Two different methods are used to perform dialysis: During hemodialysis, your blood passes through a tube into an artificial kidney, or filter. During  peritoneal dialysis , a special solution passes into your belly though a catheter tube. The solution remains in your abdomen for period of time and then is removed. This method can be done at home, at work, or while traveling.  KIDNEY TRANSPLANT A kidney transplant is surgery to place a healthy kidney into a person with kidney failure. Your doctor will refer you to a transplant center. There, you will be seen and evaluated by the transplant team. They will want to make sure that you are a good candidate for kidney transplant. SPECIAL DIET You may need to continue following a special  diet for chronic kidney disease . The diet may include: Eating foods low in protein Getting enough calories if you are losing weight Limiting fluids Limiting salt, potassium, phosphorous, and other electrolytes  OTHER TREATMENT Other treatment depends on your symptoms, but may include: Extra calcium and vitamin D (always talk to your doctor before taking supplements). Medicines called phosphate binders, to help prevent phosphorous levels from becoming too high. Treatment for anemia, such as extra iron in the diet, iron pills or shots, shots of a medicine called erythropoietin, and blood transfusions. Medicines to control your blood pressure.  Talk to your provider about vaccinations that you may need, including:  Hepatitis A vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Flu vaccine  Pneumonia vaccine (PPV) Support Groups 
 
 Some people may benefit from taking part in a  kidney disease support group .  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 End-stage kidney disease leads to death if you do not have dialysis or a kidney transplant. Both of these treatments have risks. The outcome is different for each person. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that can result from ESRD include: Anemia Bleeding from the stomach or intestines Bone, joint, and muscle pain Changes in blood sugar (glucose) Damage to nerves of the legs and arms Fluid buildup around the lungs High blood pressure ,  heart attack , and  heart failure High potassium level Increased risk of infection Liver damage or failure Malnutrition Miscarriages or infertility Restless legs syndrome Stroke ,  seizures , and dementia Swelling and edema Weakening of the bones and fractures related to high phosphorous and low calcium levels  Alternative Names 
 
 Renal failure - end stage; Kidney failure - end stage; ESRD Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Fogarty DG, Taal MW. A stepped care approach to the management of chronic kidney disease. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 62. Inker LA, Astor BC, Fox CH, et al. KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management of CKD.  Am J Kidney Dis . 2014;63(5):713-735. PMID: 24647050  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24647050 . Inker LA, Levey AS. Staging and management of chronic kidney disease. In: Gilbert SJ, Weiner DE, eds.  National Kidney Foundation Primer on Kidney Diseases . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 53. Yeun JY, Ornt DB, Depner TA. Hemodialysis. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 65. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Dementia 
 Diabetes 
 Electrolytes 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 High blood pressure 
 Infertility 
 Metabolism 
 Miscarriage 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Pericarditis 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia