
 Endometritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endometritis is an inflammation or irritation of the lining of the uterus (the endometrium). It is not the same as  endometriosis . Causes 
 
 Endometritis is caused by an infection in the uterus. It can be due to chlamydia, gonorrhea, tuberculosis, or a mix of normal vaginal bacteria. It is more likely to occur after miscarriage or childbirth. It is also more common after a long labor or C-section. The risk of endometritis is higher after having a pelvic procedure that is done through the cervix. Such procedures include: D and C  (dilation and curettage) Endometrial biopsy Hysteroscopy Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD)  Endometritis can occur at the same time as other pelvic infections.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Swelling of the abdomen Abnormal vaginal bleeding  or  discharge Discomfort with bowel movement (including constipation) Fever General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling Pain in lower abdomen or pelvic region (uterine pain)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam with a pelvic exam. Your uterus and  cervix  may be tender and the provider may not hear  bowel sounds . You may have cervical discharge. The following tests may be performed: Cultures from the cervix for  chlamydia ,  gonorrhea , and other organisms Endometrial biopsy ESR ( erythrocyte sedimentation rate ) Laparoscopy WBC ( white blood count ) Wet prep  (microscopic exam of any discharge)  Treatment 
 
 You will need to take antibiotics to treat the infection and prevent complications. Finish all your medicine if you have been given antibiotics after a pelvic procedure. Also, go to all follow-up visits with your provider.  You may need to be treated in the hospital if your symptoms are severe or occur after childbirth.  Other treatments may involve: Fluids through a vein (by IV) Rest  Sexual partners may need to be treated if the condition is caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, the condition goes away with antibiotics. Untreated endometritis can lead to more serious infections and complications.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Infertility Pelvic  peritonitis  (generalized pelvic infection) Pelvic or uterine  abscess  formation Septicemia Septic shock When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of endometritis. Call right away if symptoms occur after:  Childbirth Miscarriage Abortion IUD placement Surgery involving the uterus Prevention 
 
 Endometritis is caused by STIs. To help prevent endometritis from STIs:  Treat STIs early. Make sure sexual partners are treated in the case of a STI.  Follow safer sex practices, such as using condoms. Women having a C-section may have antibiotics before the procedure to prevent infections. Images 
 
 
 Pelvic laparoscopy 
 Endometritis 
 References 
 
 Duff P. Maternal and perinatal infection -- bacterial. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, et al, eds.  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 51. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower and upper genital tract. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Smaill FM, Gyte GM. Antibiotic prophylaxis versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection after cesarean section.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2014;10:CD007482. PMID: 25350672  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25350672 . Workowski KA, Berman S; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-03):1-137. PMID: 26042815  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . Read More 
 
 Abortion - surgical 
 Abscess 
 Acute 
 Cervicitis 
 Infertility 
 Intrauterine 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 Peritonitis 
 Septicemia 
 Septic shock 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks, MD, FACOG, pbstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pelvic Inflammatory Disease 
 Uterine Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia