
 Endocarditis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endocarditis is inflammation of the inside lining of the heart chambers and heart valves (endocardium). It is caused by a bacterial or, rarely a fungal infection. Causes 
 
 Endocarditis can involve the heart muscle, heart valves, or lining of the heart. Some people who develop endocarditis have a: Birth defect of the heart Damaged or abnormal heart valve History of endocarditis New heart valve after surgery  Endocarditis begins when germs enter the bloodstream and then travel to the heart. Bacterial infection is the most common cause of endocarditis. Endocarditis can also be caused by fungi, such as Candida. In some cases, no cause can be found.  Germs are most likely to enter the bloodstream during: Central venous access lines Injection drug use, from the use of unclean (unsterile) needles Recent dental surgery Other surgeries or minor procedures to the breathing tract, urinary tract, infected skin, or bones and muscles  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of endocarditis may develop slowly or suddenly. Fever, chills, and sweating are frequent symptoms. These sometimes can: Be present for days before any other symptoms appear Come and go, or be more noticeable at nighttime  You may also have fatigue, weakness, and aches and pains in the muscles or joints.  Other signs can include: Small areas of bleeding under the nails ( splinter hemorrhages ) Red, painless skin spots on the palms and soles (Janeway lesions) Red, painful nodes in the pads of the fingers and toes (Osler's nodes) Shortness of breath  with activity Swelling of feet, legs, abdomen  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may detect a new  heart murmur , or a change in a past heart murmur.  An eye exam may show bleeding in the retina and a central area of clearing. This finding is known as Roth's spots. There may be small, pinpoint areas of bleeding on the surface of the eye or the eyelids.  Tests that may be done include: Blood culture  to help identify the bacteria or fungus that is causing the infection  Complete blood count  (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), or  erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) A routine  echocardiogram  or a  transesophageal echocardiogram  to look at the heart valves  Treatment 
 
 You may need to be in hospital to get antibiotics through a vein (IV or intravenously). Blood cultures and tests will help your provider choose the best antibiotic.  You will then need long-term antibiotic therapy.  People most often need therapy for 4 to 6 weeks to fully kill all the bacteria from the heart chambers and valves. Antibiotic treatments that are started in the hospital will need to be continued at home.  Surgery to replace the heart valve is usually needed when: The infection is breaking off in little pieces, resulting in strokes. The person develops heart failure as a result of damaged heart valves. There is evidence of more severe organ damage.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Getting treatment for endocarditis right away improves the chances of a good outcome.  More serious problems that may develop include: Brain abscess Further damage to the heart valves, causing heart failure Spread of the infection to other parts of the body Stroke, caused by small clots or pieces of the infection breaking off and traveling to the brain  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you notice the following symptoms during or after treatment: Blood in urine Chest pain Fatigue Fever Numbness Weakness Weight loss without change in diet Prevention 
 
 The American Heart Association recommends preventive antibiotics for people at risk for infectious endocarditis, such as those with: Certain birth defects of the heart Heart transplant and valve problems Man-made (prosthetic) heart valves Past history of endocarditis  These people should receive antibiotics when they have: Dental procedures that are likely to cause bleeding Procedures involving the breathing tract Procedures involving the urinary tract system Procedures involving the digestive tract Procedures on skin infections and soft tissue infections  Alternative Names 
 
 Valve infection;  Staphylococcus aureus -  endocarditis; Enterococcus - endocarditis;  Streptococcus viridans  - endocarditis;  Candida  - endocarditis Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Janeway lesion - close-up 
 Janeway lesion on the finger 
 Heart valves 
 References 
 
 Baddour LM, Freeman WK, Suri RM, Wilson WR. Cardiovascular infections. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 64. Fowler VG Jr, Scheld WM, Bayer AS. Endocarditis and Intravascular Infections. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2009; chapt 77. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association: a guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group.  Circulation . 2007 Oct 9;116(15):1736-54. Read More 
 
 Aortic valve surgery - minimally invasive 
 Aortic valve surgery - open 
 Arrhythmias 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Blood clots 
 Brain abscess 
 Culture-negative endocarditis 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Gonorrhea 
 Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive 
 Mitral valve surgery - open 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Heart valve surgery - discharge  
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endocarditis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia