
 Endometrial biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Endometrial  biopsy  is the removal of a small piece of tissue from the lining of the uterus (endometrium) for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure may be done with or without anesthesia. This is a medicine that allows you to sleep during the procedure. You lie on your back with your feet supported by a footrest. Your health care provider gently inserts an instrument (speculum) into the vagina to hold it open so that your  cervix  can be viewed. The cervix is cleaned with a special liquid. Numbing medicine may be applied to the cervix.  The cervix may then be gently grasped with an instrument to hold the uterus steady. Another instrument may be needed to gently stretch the cervical opening if there is tightness. An instrument is gently passed through the cervix into the uterus to collect the tissue sample. The tissue sample and instruments are removed.  The tissue is sent to a lab. There, it is examined under a microscope. If you had anesthesia for the procedure, you are taken to a recovery area. Nurses will make sure you are comfortable. After you wake up and have no problems from the anesthesia and procedure, you are allowed to go home. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Before the test: 
  Tell your provider about all the medicines you take. These include blood thinners such as warfarin, clopidogrel, and aspirin. You may be asked to have a test to check if you are pregnant. In the 2 days before the procedure, do not use creams or other medicines in the vagina. Do NOT douche. (You should never douche. Douching can cause infection of the vagina or uterus.) Ask your provider if you should take pain medicine, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen, just before the procedure.
   How the Test will Feel 
 
 The instruments may feel cold. You may feel some pain when the cervix is grasped. You may have some cramping as the instruments enter the uterus and the sample is collected. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to find the cause of: Abnormal menstrual periods (heavy, prolonged, or irregular bleeding) Bleeding after  menopause Bleeding from taking hormone therapy medicines Thickened uterine lining seen on ultrasound Endometrial cancer Normal Results 
 
 The biopsy is normal if the cells in the sample are not abnormal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal menstrual periods may be caused by: Uterine fibroids Fingerlike growths in the uterus (uterine polyps) Infection Hormone imbalance Endometrial cancer or precancer ( hyperplasia ) Other conditions under which the test may be performed: Abnormal bleeding if a woman is taking the breast cancer medicine tamoxifen Abnormal bleeding due to changes in hormone levels ( anovulatory bleeding ) Risks 
 
 
Risks of endometrial biopsy include: Infection Causing a hole in (perforating) the uterus or tearing the cervix (rarely occurs) Prolonged bleeding Slight spotting and mild cramping for a few days Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - endometrium Images 
 
 
 Pelvic laparoscopy 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Endometrial biopsy 
 Uterus 
 Endometrial biopsy 
 References 
 
 Choby BA. Endometrial biopsy. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger & Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 143. Lentz GM. Endoscopy: hysteroscopy and laparoscopy: indications, contraindications and complications. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 10.
 Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Endometrial cancer 
 Endometritis 
 Infertility 
 Menopause 
 Uterine fibroids 
 Vaginal bleeding - hormonal 
 
 Review Date 9/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel N. Sacks MD, FACOG, obstetrics & gynecology in private practice, West Palm Beach, FL. Review Provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Menstruation 
 Uterine Cancer 
 Vaginal Bleeding 
 Browse the Encyclopedia