
 Entropion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Entropion is the turning in of an edge of an eyelid, causing the lashes to rub against the eye. It most often is seen on the lower eyelid. Causes 
 
 Entropion can be present at birth (congenital). In babies, it rarely causes problems because the lashes are very soft and do not easily damage the eye. In older people, the condition is most often caused by a spasm or weakening of the muscles surrounding the lower part of the eye.  Another cause can be  trachoma  infection, which can lead to scarring of the inner side of the lid. This is rare in North America and Europe. However, trachoma scarring is one of the three leading causes of blindness in the world. Risk factors for entropion are: Aging Chemical burn Infection with trachoma  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Decreased vision if the cornea is damaged Excessive tearing Eye discomfort  or pain Eye irritation Redness  Exams and Tests 
 
 In most cases, your health care provider can diagnose this condition by looking at your eyelids. Special tests are not often necessary. Treatment 
 
 Artificial tears can keep the eye from becoming dry and may help you feel better. Surgery to correct the position of the eyelids works well in most cases. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is most often good if the condition is treated before eye damage occurs. Possible Complications 
 
 Dry eye and irritation may increase the risk of:  Corneal abrasions Corneal ulcers Eye infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Your eyelids turn inward You constantly feel as though there is  something in your eye If you have entropion, the following should be considered an emergency: Decreasing vision Light sensitivity Pain Eye redness that increases rapidly  Prevention 
 
 Most cases cannot be prevented. Treatment reduces the risk of complications. See your health care provider if you have red eyes after visiting an area where there is trachoma (such as North Africa or South Asia). Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Gigantelli JW. Entropion In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 12.6. Read More 
 
 Chemical burn or reaction 
 Corneal injury 
 Trachoma 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia