
 Epidural hematoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An epidural hematoma (EDH) is bleeding between the inside of the skull and the outer covering of the brain (called the dura). Causes 
 
 An EDH is often caused by a skull  fracture  during childhood or adolescence. This type of bleeding is more common in young people because the membrane covering the brain is not as closely attached to the skull as it is in older people and children younger than 2 years. An EDH can also occur due to rupture of a blood vessel, usually an artery. The blood vessel then bleeds into the space between the dura and the skull. The affected vessels are often torn by skull fractures. The fractures are most often the result of a severe head injury, such as those caused by motorcycle or automobile accidents. Rapid bleeding causes a collection of blood (hematoma) that presses on the brain. The pressure inside the head ( intracranial pressure, ICP ) increases quickly. This pressure may result in more brain injury. Symptoms 
 
 Contact a health care provider for any  head injury  that results in even a brief  loss of consciousness , or if there are any other symptoms after a head injury (even without loss of consciousness). The typical pattern of symptoms that indicate an EDH is a loss of consciousness, followed by alertness, then loss of consciousness again. But this pattern may NOT appear in all people. The most important symptoms of an EDH are: Confusion Dizziness Drowsiness  or altered level of alertness Enlarged pupil in one eye Headache  (severe) Head injury  or trauma followed by  loss of consciousness , a period of alertness, then rapid deterioration back to  unconsciousness Nausea or vomiting Weakness  in part of the body, usually on the opposite side from the side with the enlarged pupil  The symptoms usually occur within minutes to hours after a head injury and indicate an emergency situation. Sometimes, bleeding does not start for hours after a head injury. The symptoms of pressure on the brain also do not occur right away. Exams and Tests 
 
 The brain and nervous system (neurological) examination may show that a specific part of the brain is not working well (for instance, there may be arm weakness on one side). The exam may also indicate increased ICP. If there is increased ICP, emergency surgery may be needed to relieve the pressure and prevent further brain injury. A  head CT scan  will confirm the diagnosis of EDH, and will pinpoint the exact location of the hematoma and any associated skull fracture. Treatment 
 
 An EDH is an emergency condition. Treatment goals include: Taking measures to save the person's life Controlling symptoms Minimizing or preventing permanent damage to the brain Life support measures may be required. Emergency surgery is almost always necessary to reduce pressure within the brain. This may include drilling a small hole in the skull to relieve pressure and allow blood to drain from the brain. Large hematomas or solid  blood clots  may need to be removed through a larger opening in the skull ( craniotomy ). Medicines used in addition to surgery will vary according to the type and severity of symptoms and brain damage that occurs. Antiseizure medicines may be used to control or prevent seizures. Some drugs called hyperosmotic agents may be used to reduce brain swelling. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 An epidural hematoma has a high risk of death without prompt surgical intervention. Even with prompt medical attention, a significant risk of death and disability remains. Possible Complications 
 
 There is a risk of permanent brain injury, even if EDH is treated. Symptoms (such as  seizures ) may persist for several months, even after treatment. In time they may become less frequent or disappear. Seizures may begin up to 2 years after the injury. In adults, most recovery occurs in the first 6 months. Usually there is some improvement over 2 years. Children usually recover more quickly and fully than adults. If there is brain damage, full recovery isn't likely. Other complications include permanent symptoms, such as: Herniation of the brain  and permanent coma Normal pressure hydrocephalus , which can lead to weakness, headaches, incontinence, and difficulty walking Paralysis or loss of sensation (which began at the time of the injury)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call 911 if symptoms of epidural hematoma occur. Spinal injuries often occur with head injuries. If you must move the person before help arrives, try to keep his or her neck still. Call the provider if these symptoms persist after treatment: Memory loss or problems focusing Dizziness Headache Anxiety Speech problems Loss of movement in part of the body Go to the emergency room or call 911 in emergency if these symptoms develop after treatment: Trouble breathing Seizures Enlarged pupils of the eyes or 2 pupils are not same size Decreased responsiveness Loss of consciousness Prevention 
 
 An EDH may not be preventable once a head injury has occurred. To lessen the risk of head injury, use the right safety equipment (such as hard hats, bicycle or motorcycle helmets, and seat belts). Follow safety precautions at work and in sports and recreation. For example, do not dive into water if the water depth is unknown or if rocks may be present. Alternative Names 
 
 Extradural hematoma; Extradural hemorrhage; Epidural hemorrhage; EDH References 
 
 Heegaard WG, Biros MH. Head injury. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 41. Stippler M. Craniocerebral trauma. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Brain herniation 
 Broken bone 
 Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia