
 Epidural abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An epidural  abscess  is a collection of pus (infected material) between the outer covering of the brain and spinal cord and the bones of the skull or spine. The abscess causes swelling in the area. Causes 
 
 Epidural abscess is a rare disorder caused by infection in the area between the bones of the skull, or spine, and the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord (meninges). This infection is called an intracranial epidural abscess if it is inside the skull area. It is called a spinal epidural abscess if it is found in the spine area. Most are located in the spine. The spinal infection is usually caused by bacteria, but may be caused by a fungus. It can be due to other infections in the body (especially a urinary tract infection), or germs that spread through the blood. In some people, though, no other source of infection is found. An abscess inside the skull is called an intracranial epidural abscess. The cause may be any of the following: Chronic ear infections Chronic sinusitis Head injury Mastoiditis Recent neurosurgery  An abscess of the spine is called a spinal epidural abscess. It may be seen in people with any of the following: Had back surgery or another invasive procedure involving the spine Bloodstream infections Boils  especially on the back or scalp Bone infections of the spine (vertebral osteomyelitis)  People who inject drugs are also at increased risk. Symptoms 
 
 Spinal epidural abscess may cause these symptoms: Bowel  or  bladder incontinence Difficulty urinating (urinary retention) Fever and back pain  Intracranial epidural abscess may cause these symptoms: Fever Headache Lethargy Nausea and vomiting Pain at the site of recent surgery that gets worse (especially if fever is present)  Nervous system symptoms depend on the location of the abscess and may include: Decreased ability to move any part of the body Loss of sensation  in any area of the body, or abnormal changes in sensation Weakness  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam to look for a loss of functions, such as movement or sensation. Tests that may be done include: Blood cultures Complete blood count (CBC) CT  scan of head or spine Draining of abscess and examination of the material MRI  of head or spine  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection and reduce the risk of permanent damage. Treatment usually includes antibiotics and surgery. In some cases, antibiotics alone are used. Antibiotics are usually given through a vein (IV) for at least 4 to 6 weeks. Some people need to take them for a longer time, depending on the type of bacteria and how severe the disease is. Surgery may be needed to drain or remove the abscess. Surgery is also often needed to reduce pressure on the spinal cord or brain, if there is weakness or damage to the nerves. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Early diagnosis and treatment greatly improves the chance of a good outcome. Once weakness,  paralysis , or sensation changes occur, the chance of recovering lost function are reduced. Permanent nervous system damage or death may occur. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain abscess Brain damage Bone infection (osteomyelitis) Chronic back pain Meningitis Nerve damage Return of infection Spinal cord abscess When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 An epidural abscess is a medical emergency. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of spinal cord abscess. Prevention 
 
 Treatment of certain infections, such as  ear infections ,  sinusitis , and bloodstream infections, may decrease the risk of an epidural abscess. Early diagnosis and treatment are important to prevent complications. Alternative Names 
 
 Abscess - epidural; Spinal abscess References 
 
 Bartt RE. Cranial epidural abscess and subdural empyema.  Handb Clin Neurol . 2010;96:75-89. PMID 20109676  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20109676 .  Nath A, Berger J. Brain abscess and parameningeal infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 421. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Boils 
 Brain abscess 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Mastoiditis 
 Meningitis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Spinal cord abscess 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Spinal Cord Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia