
 Erythrasma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Erythrasma is a long-term skin infection caused by bacteria. It commonly occurs in skin folds.   Causes 
 
 Erythrasma is caused by the bacteria  Corynebacterium minutissimum .  Erythrasma is more common in warm climates. You are more likely to develop this condition if you are overweight, older, or have  diabetes . Symptoms 
 
 The main symptoms are reddish-brown slightly scaly  patches  with sharp borders. They may itch slightly. The patches occur in moist areas such as the groin, armpit, and skin folds.  The patches often look similar to other fungal infections, such as  ringworm . Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will check your skin and ask about the symptoms. These tests can help diagnose erythrasma: Lab tests of scrapings from the skin patch Examination under a special lamp called a  Wood lamp A skin biopsy Treatment 
 
 Your provider may suggest the following: Gentle scrubbing of the skin patches with antibacterial soap Antibiotic medicine applied to the skin Antibiotics taken by mouth Laser treatment Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The condition should go away after treatment.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of erythrasma. Prevention 
 
 You may be able to reduce the risk of erythrasma if you: Bathe or shower often Keep your skin dry Wear clean clothes that absorb moisture Avoid very hot or damp conditions Maintain a healthy body weight  Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Barkham MC. Erythrasma. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 74. Habif TP. Superficial fungal infections. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 13. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Diabetes 
 Patches 
 
 Review Date 10/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia