
 Esophageal culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Esophageal culture is a laboratory test that checks for infection-causing germs in a sample of tissue from the esophagus. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of tissue from your esophagus is needed. The sample is taken during a procedure called  esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) . The sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture) and watched for the growth of bacteria, fungi, or viruses. Other tests may be done to determine what medicine can best treat the organism. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Follow your health care provider's instructions on how to prepare for EGD. How the Test will Feel 
 
 During EGD, you will receive medicine to relax you. You may have some discomfort or feel like gagging as the endoscope is passed through your mouth and throat into the esophagus. This feeling will go away shortly. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this test if you have signs or symptoms of an esophageal infection or disease. You may also have the test if an ongoing infection does not get better with treatment. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means that no germs grew in the laboratory dish. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means germs grew in the laboratory dish. This is a sign of an infection of the esophagus, which may be due to bacteria, a virus, or a fungus. Risks 
 
 Risks are related to the EGD procedure. Your health care provider can explain these risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - esophageal Images 
 
 
 Esophageal tissue culture 
 References 
 
 Graman PS. Esophagitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 99. Katzka DA. Esophageal disorders caused by medications, trauma, and infection. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 46. Read More 
 
 Esophagitis - infectious 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia