
 Esophageal atresia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Esophageal atresia is a disorder of the digestive system in which the esophagus does not develop properly. The esophagus is the tube that normally carries food from the mouth to the stomach. Causes 
 
 Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital defect. This means it occurs before birth. There are several types. In most cases, the upper esophagus ends and does not connect with the lower esophagus and stomach.  Most infants with EA have another defect called tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). This is an abnormal connection between the esophagus and the windpipe (trachea). In addition, infants with EA/TEF often have  tracheomalacia . This is a weakness and floppiness of the walls of the windpipe, which can cause breathing to sound high-pitched or noisy. Some babies with EA/TEF have other defects as well, most commonly heart defects. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of EA may include: Bluish coloration to the skin (cyanosis) with attempted feeding Coughing, gagging, and choking with attempted feeding Drooling Poor feeding Exams and Tests 
 
 Before birth, a mother's ultrasound may show too much amniotic fluid. This can be a sign of EA or other blockage of the baby's digestive tract.  The disorder is usually detected shortly after birth when the infant tries to feed and then coughs, chokes, and turns blue. If EA is suspected, the health care provider will try to pass a small feeding tube through the infant’s mouth or nose into the stomach. If the feeding tube can’t pass all the way to the stomach, the infant will likely be diagnosed with EA. An x-ray is then done and will show any of the following: An air-filled pouch in the esophagus. Air in the stomach and intestine. If a feeding tube has been inserted before the x-ray, it will appear coiled in the upper esophagus. Treatment 
 
 EA is a surgical emergency.  Surgery  to repair the esophagus is done as soon as possible after birth so that the lungs are not damaged and the baby can be fed. Before the surgery, the baby is not fed by mouth and will need intravenous (IV) nutrition. Care is taken to prevent the baby from breathing secretions into the lungs. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 An early diagnosis gives a better chance of a good outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 The infant may breathe saliva and other fluids into the lungs, causing aspiration pneumonia, choking, and possibly death. Other complications may include: Feeding problems Reflux (the repeated bringing up of food from the stomach) after surgery Narrowing (stricture) of the esophagus due to scarring from surgery Prematurity  may complicate the condition. As noted above, there may also be defects in other areas of the body. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This disorder is usually diagnosed shortly after birth. Call your baby's provider right away if the baby vomits repeatedly after feedings, or if the baby develops breathing difficulties. Images 
 
 
 Tracheoesophageal fistula repair - series 
 References 
 
 Madanick R, Orlando RC. Developmental anomalies of the esophagus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 42. Rothenberg SS. Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula malformations. In: Holcomb GW, Murphy JP, Ostlie DJ, eds.  Ashcraft's Pediatric Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 27. Read More 
 
 Premature infant 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia repair 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kimberly G Lee, MD, MSc, IBCLC, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Fistulas 
 Browse the Encyclopedia