
 Esophageal stricture - benign 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Benign esophageal stricture is a narrowing of the esophagus (the tube from the mouth to the stomach). It causes swallowing difficulties. Benign means that it is not caused by  cancer of the esophagus .  Causes 
 
 Esophageal stricture can be caused by: Gastroesophageal reflux  (GERD) Eosinophilic esophagitis Injuries caused by an  endoscope Long-term use of a nasogastric (NG) tube (tube through the nose into the stomach) Swallowing substances that harm the lining of the esophagus. These may include household cleaners, lye, disc batteries, or battery acid. Treatment of  esophageal varices Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Trouble swallowing Pain with swallowing Unintentional weight loss Regurgitation of food  Exams and Tests 
 
 You may need the following tests: Barium swallow  to look for narrowing of the esophagus Endoscopy  to look for narrowing of the esophagus Treatment 
 
 Dilation (stretching) of the esophagus is the main treatment for acid reflux related strictures. You may need to have this treatment repeated after a period of time to prevent the stricture from narrowing again. Proton pump inhibitors (acid-blocking medicines) can keep a peptic stricture from returning. Surgery is rarely needed. If you have eosinophilic esophagitis, you may need to take medicines or make changes to your diet to reduce the inflammation. In some cases, dilation is done. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The stricture may come back in the future. This would require a repeat dilation. Possible Complications 
 
 Swallowing problems may keep you from getting enough fluids and nutrients. Solid food, especially meat, can get stuck above the stricture. If this happens, endoscopy would be needed to remove the lodged food.  There is also a higher risk of having food, fluid, or vomit enter the lungs with regurgitation. This can cause choking or  aspiration pneumonia . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have swallowing problems that do not go away. Prevention 
 
 Use safety measures to avoid swallowing substances that can harm your esophagus. Keep dangerous chemicals out of the reach of children. See your doctor if you have GERD.  Images 
 
 
 Schatzki ring - x-ray 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Ginsberg GG, Pfau PR. Foreign bodies, bezoards, and caustic ingestions. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Bleeding esophageal varices 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Anti-reflux surgery - discharge  
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia