
 Exchange transfusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Exchange transfusion is a potentially life-saving procedure that is done to counteract the effects of serious jaundice or changes in the blood due to diseases such as sickle cell anemia. The procedure involves slowly removing the person's blood and replacing it with fresh donor blood or plasma. Description 
 
 An exchange transfusion requires that the person's blood be removed and replaced. In most cases, this involves placing 1 or more thin tubes, called catheters, into a blood vessel. The exchange transfusion is done in cycles, each one most often lasts a few minutes. The person's blood is slowly withdrawn (most often about 5 to 20 mL at a time, depending on the person's size and the severity of illness). An equal amount of fresh, prewarmed blood or plasma flows into the person's body. This cycle is repeated until the correct volume of blood has been replaced. After the exchange transfusion, catheters may be left in place in case the procedure needs to be repeated. In diseases such as sickle cell anemia, blood is removed and replaced with donor blood. In conditions such as  neonatal polycythemia , a specific amount of the child's blood is removed and replaced with a normal saline solution, plasma (the clear liquid part of blood), or albumin (a solution of blood proteins). This decreases the total number of red blood cells in the body and makes it easier for blood to flow through the body. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 An exchange transfusion may be needed to treat the following conditions: Dangerously high red blood cell count in a newborn (neonatal polycythemia) Rh-induced hemolytic disease of the newborn Severe disturbances in body chemistry Severe newborn jaundice that does not respond to  phototherapy with bili lights Severe sickle cell crisis Toxic effects of certain drugs  Risks 
 
 General risks are the same as with any transfusion. Other possible complications include: Blood clots Changes in blood chemistry (high or low potassium, low calcium, low glucose, change in acid-base balance in the blood) Heart and lung problems Infection (very low risk due to careful screening of blood) Shock if not enough blood is replaced  After the Procedure 
 
 The infant may need to be monitored for several days in the hospital after the transfusion. The length of stay depends on what condition the exchange transfusion was performed to treat. Images 
 
 
 Exchange transfusion - series 
 References 
 
 Maheshwari A, Carlo WA. Blood disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, et al, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 103. Saunthararajah S, Vichinsky EP. Sickle cell disease - clinical features and management. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 40. Watchko JF. Neonatal indirect hyperbilirubinemia and kernicterus. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 79. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Newborn jaundice - discharge 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Transfusion and Donation 
 Common Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Jaundice 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia