
 Exogenous Cushing syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Exogenous Cushing syndrome is a form of Cushing syndrome that occurs in people taking glucocorticoid (also called corticosteroid) hormones. Causes 
 
 Cushing syndrome  is a disorder that occurs when your body has a higher than normal level of the hormone cortisol. This hormone is normally made in the  adrenal glands . Exogenous means caused by something outside the body. Exogenous Cushing syndrome occurs when a person takes man-made (synthetic) glucocorticoid medicines to treat a disease.  Glucocorticoids are given for many diseases, such as lung diseases, skin conditions, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, brain tumors, and joint disease. These medicines come in many forms, including pill, intravenous (IV), injection, enema, skin creams, inhalers, and eye drops. Symptoms 
 
 Most people with Cushing syndrome have: Round, red, full face ( moon face ) Slow growth rate (in children) Weight gain with fat accumulation on the trunk, but fat loss from the arms, legs, and buttocks (central obesity)  Skin changes that are often seen include: Skin infections Purple marks (1/2 inch or 1 centimeter or more wide), called  striae , on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, and breasts Thin skin with easy bruising  Muscle and bone changes include: Backache, which occurs with routine activities Bone pain or tenderness Collection of fat between the shoulders and above the collar bone Rib and spine fractures caused by  thinning of the bones Weak muscles, especially of the hips and shoulders  Women may have: Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs Periods that become irregular or stop  Men may have: Decreased or no desire for sex Erection problems Other symptoms that may occur include:  
 Mental changes, such as depression, anxiety, or changes in behavior Fatigue Headache Increased thirst and urination  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and the medicines you are taking. Tell the provider about all medicines you have been taking for the past several months. Also tell the provider about shots that you received at a provider's office. If you use cortisone, prednisone, or other corticosteroids, the following test results may suggest exogenous Cushing syndrome: Low  ACTH  level Low  cortisol level  (or high cortisol level) depending on the medicine you are taking No response to an  ACTH stimulation test Higher than normal  fasting glucose Low  blood potassium  level Low bone density, as measured by  bone mineral density test High cholesterol, particularly high triglycerides and low high-density lipoprotein (HDL)  A method called high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) can show a high level of the suspected medicine in the urine. Treatment 
 
 Treatment is to slowly decrease and eventually stop taking any corticosteroids. Do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your provider. Suddenly stopping corticosteroids after taking them for a long time can result in a life-threatening condition called  adrenal crisis .  If you cannot stop taking the medicine because of disease (for example, you need steroids to treat severe asthma), follow your provider's instructions on how to reduce the possibility of developing complications, including: Treating high blood sugar with diet, oral medicines, or insulin. Treating high cholesterol with diet or medicines. Taking medicines to prevent bone loss. This can help reduce the risk of fractures if you develop osteoporosis.  Taking medicine to decrease the amount of glucocorticoid medicine that you need. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Slowly tapering the medicine that is causing the condition can help reverse the effects of adrenal gland shrinkage (atrophy). This may take as long as a year. During this time, you may need to restart or increase the dosage of your steroids in times of stress or illness. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from exogenous Cushing syndrome include any of the following: Low immune system, which may lead to frequent infections Damage to the eyes, kidneys, and nerves due to untreated high blood sugar Diabetes High cholesterol  levels Increased risk of heart attack from untreated diabetes and high cholesterol Weak bones ( osteoporosis ) and increased risk of fractures These complications can generally be prevented with proper treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you are taking a corticosteroid and you develop symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Prevention 
 
 If you take a corticosteroid, know the signs and symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Getting treated early can help prevent any long-term effects of Cushing syndrome. If you use inhaled steroids, you can decrease your exposure to the steroids by using a spacer and by rinsing your mouth after breathing in the steroids. Alternative Names 
 
 Cushing syndrome - corticosteroid induced; Corticosteroid-induced Cushing syndrome; Iatrogenic Cushing syndrome Images 
 
 
 Hypothalamus hormone production 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Cushing's disease and syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia: PA Elsevier Mosby; 2016:385-386. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. Treatment of Cushing's syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100:2807-2831. PMID: 26222757  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26222757 . Stewart PM, Newell-Price JDC. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Cushing syndrome 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cushing's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia