
 Expressive language disorder - developmental 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Developmental expressive language disorder is a condition in which a child has lower than normal ability in vocabulary, saying complex sentences, and remembering words. However, a child with this disorder may have the normal language skills needed to understand verbal or written communication. Causes 
 
 Expressive language disorder is common in school-aged children. The causes are not well understood. Damage to the cerebrum of the brain and  malnutrition  may cause some cases. Genetic factors may also be involved.  Symptoms 
 
 Children with an expressive language disorder have a hard time getting their meaning or message across to others. Symptoms of this disorder may include any of the following: Below-average vocabulary skills Improper use of tenses (past, present, future) Problems making complex sentences Problems remembering words  Exams and Tests 
 
 Standardized expressive language and nonverbal intellectual tests should be conducted if an expressive language disorder is suspected. Testing for other learning disabilities may also be needed. Treatment 
 
 Language therapy is the best method to treat this type of disorder. The goal is to increase the number of phrases a child can use. This is done by using block-building techniques and speech therapy. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How much the child recovers depends on the severity of the disorder. With reversible factors, such as vitamin deficiencies, there may be nearly full recovery. Children who do not have any other developmental or motor coordination problems have the best outlook (prognosis). Often, such children have a family history of delays in language milestones, but eventually catch up. Possible Complications 
 
 This disorder may lead to: Learning problems Low self-esteem Social problems When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you are concerned about a child's language development, have the child tested. Prevention 
 
 Good nutrition during pregnancy, and early childhood and prenatal care may help.  Alternative Names 
 
 Language disorder - expressive; Specific language impairment References 
 
 Nass R, Trauner DA. Developmental language disorders. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Schor NF, eds.  Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 45. Simms MD. Language development and communication disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 35. 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia