
 Eye and orbit ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An eye and orbit  ultrasound  is a test to look at the eye area. It also measures the size and structures of the eye. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is most often done in the ophthalmologist's office or the ophthalmology department of a hospital or clinic. Your eye is numbed with medicine (anesthetic drops). The ultrasound wand (transducer) is placed against the front surface of the eye. The ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves that travel through the eye. Reflections (echoes) of the sound waves form a picture of the structure of the eye. The test takes about 15 minutes. There are two types of scans: A-scan and B-scan. For the A-scan: You will most often sit in a chair and place your chin on a chin rest. You will look straight ahead. A small probe is placed against the front of your eye. The test may also be done with you lying back. With this method, a fluid-filled cup is placed against your eye to do the test.  For the B-scan: You will be seated and you may be asked to look in many directions. The test is most often done with your eyes closed. A gel is placed on the skin of your eyelids. The B-scan probe is gently placed against your eyelids to do the test.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Your eye is numbed, so you should not have any discomfort. You may be asked to look in different directions to improve the ultrasound image or so it can view different areas of your eye. The gel used with the B-scan may run down your cheek, but you will not feel any discomfort or pain. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test if you have cataracts or other eye problems. An A-scan ultrasound measures the eye to determine the right power of a lens implant before  cataract surgery . A B-scan is done to look at the inside part of the eye or the space behind the eye that cannot be seen directly. This may occur when you have  cataracts  or other conditions that make it hard for the doctor to see into the back of your eye. The test may help diagnose  retinal detachment , tumors, or other disorders. Normal Results 
 
 For an A-scan, measurements of the eye are in the normal range. For a B-scan, the structures of the eye and orbit appear normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A B-scan may show: Bleeding into the clear gel (vitreous) that fills the back of the eye (vitreous hemorrhage) Cancer of the retina ( retinoblastoma ), under the retina, or in other parts of the eye (such as  melanoma ) Damaged tissue or injuries in the bony socket (orbit) that surrounds and protects the eye Foreign bodies Pulling away of the retina from the back of the eye ( retinal detachment ) Swelling (inflammation)  Risks 
 
 To avoid scratching the cornea, do not rub the numbed eye until the anesthetic wears off (about 15 minutes). There are no other risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Echography - eye orbit; Ultrasound - eye orbit; Ocular ultrasonography; Orbital ultrasonography Images 
 
 
 Head and eye Echoencephalogram 
 References 
 
 Coleman DJ, Silverman RH, Lloyd HO, Daly S. Evaluation of the posterior chamber, vitreous and retina with ultrasound. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3, chap 3. Fisher YL, Klancnik Jr JM, Rodriguez-Coleman H, et al. Contact B-scan ultrasonography In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 6.5.  Fisher YL, Nogueira F, Salles D. Diagnostic ophthalmic ultrasonography. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 2, chap 108. Thurst SC, Miszkiel K, Davagnanam I. The orbit. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 66. Read More 
 
 Cataract - adult 
 Cataract removal 
 Melanoma of the eye 
 Retinal detachment 
 Retinoblastoma 
 Ultrasound 
 
 Review Date 2/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia