
 Eye - foreign object in 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Watch this video about: Blinking The eye will often flush out small objects, like eyelashes and sand, through blinking and tearing. DO NOT rub the eye if there is something in it. Wash your hands before examining the eye. Examine the eye in a well-lighted area. To find the object, look up and down, then from side to side. If you can't find the object, grasp the lower eyelid and gently pull down on it to look inside the lower eyelid. To look inside the upper lid, you can place a cotton-tipped swab on the outside of the upper lid and gently fold the lid over the cotton swab. If the object is on an eyelid, try to gently flush it out with water or eye drops. If that does not work, try touching a second cotton-tipped swab to the object to remove it. If the object is on the white of the eye, try gently rinsing the eye with water or eye drops. Or you can GENTLY touch a cotton swap to the object to try to remove it. If the object is on the colored part of the eye, DO NOT attempt to remove it. Your eye may still feel scratchy or uncomfortable after removing an eyelashes or other tiny object. This should go away within a day or two. If you continue to have discomfort or blurred vision, get medical help.  Contact your health care provider and DO NOT treat yourself if: You have a lot of eye pain or sensitivity to light. Your vision is decreased. You have red or painful eyes. You have flaking, discharge, or a sore on your eye or eyelid. You have had trauma to your eye, or you have a bulging eye or a drooping eyelid. Your dry eyes do not get better with self-care measures within a few days.  If you have been hammering, grinding, or could have come in contact with metal fragments, DO NOT attempt any removal.  Go to the nearest emergency room  immediately. Alternative Names 
 
 Foreign body; Particle in the eye Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Eyelid eversion 
 Foreign objects in eye 
 References 
 
 Butler FK. The eye in the wilderness. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 28. Crouch ER, Crouch ER, Grant TR. Ophthalmology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel D, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Engel K, Page M, Montezuma S, Cameron JD. Retinoblastoma. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Foundations of Clinical Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3;chap 6. Knoop KJ, Dennis WR, Hedges JR. Ophthalmologic procedures. In: Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Injuries 
 Foreign Bodies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia