
 Eyelid drooping 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Eyelid drooping is excess sagging of the upper eylid. The edge of the upper eyelid may be lower than it should be (ptosis) or there may be excess baggy skin in the upper eyelid (dermatochalasis). Eyelid drooping is often a combination of both conditions. The problem is also called ptosis. Causes 
 
 A drooping eyelid is most often due to: Weakness of the muscle that raises the eyelid Damage to the nerves that control that muscle Looseness of the skin of the upper eyelids  Drooping eyelid can be:  Caused by the normal aging process Present before birth The result of an injury or disease  Diseases or illnesses that may lead to eyelid drooping include: Tumor around or behind the eye Diabetes Horner syndrome Myasthenia gravis   Stroke Swelling in the eyelid, such as with a stye  Symptoms 
 
 Drooping of one or both eyelids is present. The lid may cover only the upper eye, or the entire pupil will be covered. Problems with vision will also be present.  At first, just a sense that the very upper field of vision is being blocked. When the drooping eyelid covers the pupil of the eye, the upper part of vision becomes blocked. Children may tip their head back to help them see under the eyelid. Tiredness and achiness around the eyes may also be present. Increased tearing  despite a feeling of dry eyes may be noticed. Exams and Tests 
 
 When drooping is on one side only, it is easy to detect by comparing the two eyelids. Drooping is more difficult to detect when it occurs on both sides, or if there is only a slight problem.  A  physical exam  will be done to determine the cause. Tests that may be performed include: Slit-lamp examination Tension test for myasthenia gravis Visual field testing Treatment 
 
 If a disease is found, it will be treated. Most cases of drooping eyelids are due to aging and there is no disease involved. Eyelid lift surgery (blepharoplasty) is done to repair sagging or drooping upper eyelids. In milder cases, it can be done to improve the appearance of the eyelids.  In more severe cases, surgery may be needed to correct interference with vision.  In children with ptosis, surgery may be needed to prevent  amblyopia , also called "lazy eye." Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A drooping eyelid can stay constant, worsen over time (be progressive), or come and go (be intermittent).  The expected outcome depends on the cause of the ptosis. In most cases, surgery is very successful in restoring appearance and function. In children, more severe drooping eyelids may lead to lazy eye or amblyopia. This may result in long-term vision loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: Eyelid drooping is affecting your appearance or vision. One eyelid suddenly droops or closes. It is associated with other symptoms, such as double vision or pain.  See an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) for: Drooping eyelids in children New or rapidly changing eyelid drooping in adults  Alternative Names 
 
 Ptosis, Dermatochalasis; Blepharoptosis; Third nerve palsy - ptosis; Baggy eyelids Images 
 
 
 Ptosis, drooping of the eyelid 
 References 
 
 Davis CM, Dryden RM. Blepharoplasty. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 5, chap 74. Savar A, Blaydon SM, Nakra T, Shore JW. Ptosis surgery. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 5, chap 78. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Amblyopia 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Cancer 
 Diabetes 
 Horner syndrome 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia