
 Factor VII deficiency 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Factor VII (seven) deficiency is a disorder caused by a lack of a protein called factor VII in the blood. It leads to problems with blood clotting (coagulation). Causes 
 
 When you bleed, a series of reactions take place in the body that helps blood clots form. This process is called the coagulation cascade. It involves special proteins called coagulation, or clotting, factors. You may have a higher chance of excess bleeding if one or more of these factors are missing or are not functioning like they should. Factor VII is one such coagulation factor. Factor VII deficiency runs in families (inherited) and is very rare. Both parents must have the gene to pass the disorder on to their children. A family history of a bleeding disorder can be a risk factor. Factor VII deficiency can also be due to another condition or use of certain medicines. This is called acquired factor VII deficiency. It can be caused by: Low vitamin K (some babies are born with vitamin K deficiency) Severe liver disease Use of medicines that prevent clotting (anticoagulants such as warfarin)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bleeding from mucus membranes Bleeding into joints Bleeding into muscles Bruising  easily Heavy menstrual bleeding Nosebleeds  that do not stop easily Umbilical cord bleeding after birth  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Partial thromboplastin time ( PTT ) Plasma  factor VII activity Prothrombin time ( PT ) Mixing study  Treatment 
 
 Bleeding can be controlled by getting intravenous (IV) infusions of normal plasma, concentrates of factor VII, or genetically produced (recombinant) factor VII.  You will need frequent treatment during bleeding episodes because factor VII does not last for long inside the body. A form of factor VII called NovoSeven can also be used.  If you have factor VII deficiency due to a lack of vitamin K, you can take this vitamin by mouth, through injections under the skin, or through a vein (intravenously). If you have this bleeding disorder, be sure to: Tell your health care providers before you have any kind of procedure, including surgery and dental work. Tell your family members because they may have the same disorder but do not know it yet.  Support Groups 
 
 Find out more about bleeding disorders through these groups: American Society of Hematology --  www.hematology.org/Patients/Blood-Disorders.aspx National Hemophilia Foundation: Other Factor Deficiencies --  www.hemophilia.org/Bleeding-Disorders/Types-of-Bleeding-Disorders/Other-Factor-Deficiencies Victory for Women with Blood Disorders --   www.hemophilia.org/Community-Resources/Women-with-Bleeding-Disorders/Victory-for-Women-with-Blood-Disorders Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You can expect a good outcome with proper treatment.  Inherited factor VII deficiency is a lifelong condition. The outlook for acquired factor II deficiency depends on the cause. If it is caused by liver disease, the outcome depends on how well your liver disease can be treated. Taking vitamin K supplements will treat vitamin K deficiency. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Excessive bleeding (hemorrhage) Stroke  or other nervous system problems from central nervous system bleeding Joint problems in severe cases when bleeding happens often  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get emergency treatment right away if you have severe, unexplained bleeding. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for inherited factor VII deficiency. When a lack of vitamin K is the cause, using vitamin K can help. Alternative Names 
 
 Extrinsic factor deficiency; Serum prothrombin conversion accelerator deficiency Images 
 
 
 Blood clot formation 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 139. Ragni MV. Hemorrhagic disorders: coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 177. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia