
 Factor XII (Hageman factor) deficiency 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Factor XII deficiency is an inherited disorder that affects a protein (factor XII) involved in blood clotting. Causes 
 
 When you bleed, a series of reactions take place in the body that helps blood clots form. This process is called the coagulation cascade. It involves special proteins called coagulation, or clotting, factors. You may have a higher chance of excess bleeding if one or more of these factors are missing or are not functioning like they should. Factor XII is one such factor. A lack of this factor does not cause you to bleed abnormally. But, the blood takes longer than normal to clot in a test tube. Factor XII deficiency is a rare inherited disorder. Symptoms 
 
 There are usually no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 Factor XII deficiency is most often found when clotting tests are done for routine screening. Tests may include: Factor XII assay Partial thromboplastin time ( PTT ) Mixing study  Treatment 
 
 Treatment is usually not needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is expected to be good without treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 There are usually no complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 The health care provider usually discovers this condition when running other lab tests. Prevention 
 
 This is an inherited disorder. There is no known way to prevent it. Images 
 
 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 139. Ragni MV. Hemorrhagic disorders: coagulation deficiencies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 177. 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, assistant professor of medicine, section of hematology/oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bleeding Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia