
 Factor IX assay 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The factor IX assay is a blood test that measures the activity of factor IX. This is one of the proteins in the body that helps the blood clot.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may need to stop taking some medicines before this test. Your health care provider will tell you which ones. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to find the cause of too much bleeding (decreased blood clotting). Or, it may be ordered if a family member is known to have  hemophilia B . The test may also be done to see how well treatment for hemophilia B is working. Normal Results 
 
 A normal value is 50 to 200% of the laboratory control or reference value. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Decreased factor IX activity may be related to: Congenital deficiency of factor IX  (hemophilia B) Disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become over active ( disseminated intravascular coagulation ) Fat  malabsorption  (not absorbing enough fat from your diet) Liver disease  (such as  cirrhosis ) Vitamin K  deficiency Taking the blood thinning drug called warfarin (Coumadin)  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size so it may be harder to take a blood sample from one person than another. Other slight risks from having blood drawn but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  This test is most often done on people who have bleeding problems. The risk of excessive bleeding is slightly more than for people without bleeding problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Christmas factor assay; Serum factor IX References 
 
 Carcao M, Moorehead P, Lillicrap D. Hemophilia A and B. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 137. Schmaier AH. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 131. Read More 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hemophilia B 
 Liver disease 
 Malabsorption 
 Vitamin K 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemophilia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia