
 
 
 
 
 Fecal impaction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
          			A fecal impaction is a large lump of dry, hard stool that stays stuck in the rectum. It is most often seen in people who are constipated for a long time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constipation is when you are not passing stool as often or as easily as is normal for you. Your stool becomes hard and dry. This makes it difficult to pass. Fecal impaction often occurs in people who have had constipation for a long time and have been using laxatives. The problem is even more likely when the laxatives are stopped suddenly. The muscles of the intestines forget how to move stool or feces on their own. You are at more risk for chronic constipation and fecal impaction if: 
 
 You not move around much and spend most of your time in a chair or bed. 
 You have a disease of the brain or nervous system that damages the nerves that go to the muscles of the intestines. 
 
 Certain drugs slow the passage of stool through the bowels: 
 
 Anticholinergics, which affect the interaction between nerves and muscles of the bowel 
 Medicines used to treat diarrhea, if they are taken too often 
 Narcotic pain medicine, such as methadone and codeine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Common symptoms include: 
 
 Abdominal cramping and bloating 
 Leakage of liquid or sudden episodes of watery  diarrhea  in someone who has  chronic  (long-term) constipation 
 Rectal bleeding 
 Small, semi-formed stools 
 Straining when trying to pass stools 
 
 Other possible symptoms include: 
 
 Bladder pressure or loss of bladder control 
 Lower back pain 
 Rapid heartbeat or lightheadedness from straining to pass stool 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The health care provider will examine your stomach area and rectum. The rectal exam will show a hard mass of stool in the rectum. You may need to have a  colonoscopy  if there has been a recent change in your bowel habits. This is done to check for colon or rectal cancer. 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment for the condition starts with removal of the impacted stool. After that, steps are taken to prevent future fecal impactions. Often a warm mineral oil enema is used to soften and lubricate the stool. However, enemas alone are not enough to remove a large, hardened impaction in most cases. The mass may have to be broken up by hand. This is called manual removal: 
 
 A provider will need to insert one or two fingers into the rectum and slowly break up the mass into smaller pieces so that it can come out. 
 This process must be done in small steps to avoid causing injury to the rectum. 
 Suppositories inserted into the rectum may be given between attempts to help clear the stool. 
 
 Surgery is rarely needed to treat a fecal impaction. An overly widened colon (megacolon) or complete blockage of the bowel may require emergency removal of the impaction. Most people who have had a fecal impaction will need a bowel retraining program. Your provider and a specially trained nurse or therapist will: 
 
 Take a detailed history of your diet, bowel patterns, laxative use, medicines, and medical problems 
 Examine you carefully. 
 Recommend changes in your diet, how to use laxatives and stool softeners, special exercises, lifestyle changes, and other special techniques to retrain your bowel. 
 Follow you closely to make sure the program works for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 With treatment, the outcome is good. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Possible Complications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Complications may include: 
 
 Tear (ulceration) of the rectal tissue 
 Tissue death ( necrosis ) or rectal tissue injury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tell your provider if you have chronic diarrhea or fecal incontinence after a long period of constipation. Also tell your provider if you have any of the following symptoms: 
 
 Abdominal pain and  bloating 
 Blood in the stool 
 Sudden constipation with  abdominal cramps , and an inability to pass gas or stool. In this case, do not take any laxatives. Call your provider immediately. 
 Very thin, pencil-like stools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Impaction of the bowels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lembo AJ, Ullman SP. Constipation. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 18. Madoff RD. Diseases of the rectum and anus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 147. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 1/22/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constipation - self-care 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Constipation 
 Read more       
   
 
