
 Felty syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Felty syndrome is a disorder that involves  rheumatoid arthritis , a swollen spleen, decreased  white blood cell count , and repeated infections. It is rare. Causes 
 
 The cause of Felty syndrome is unknown. It is more common in people who have had rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for a long time. People with this syndrome are at risk for infection because they have a low white blood cell count. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: General feeling of discomfort ( malaise ) Fatigue Loss of appetite Unintentional weight loss Pale-looking skin Joint swelling , stiffness, pain, and deformity Recurrent infections Eye burning or discharge  Exams and Tests 
 
 A  physical exam  will show: Swollen spleen Joints that show signs of rheumatoid arthritis Possibly swollen liver and lymph nodes  A complete blood count ( CBC ) may show a lower number of white blood cells called neutrophils. An  abdominal ultrasound  may confirm a swollen spleen. Treatment 
 
 In most cases, people who have this syndrome are not getting full treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. They may need other medicines to suppress their immune system and reduce the activity of their RA. Methotrexate may improve the low white blood cell count. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) may raise the neutrophil count. Some people benefit from removal of the spleen ( splenectomy ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, infections may continue to occur. RA is likely to get worse. Possible Complications 
 
 You may have infections that keep coming back. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of RA with currently available medicines decreases the risk of developing Felty syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA); Felty's syndrome Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Starkebaum G. Use of colony-stimulating factors in the treatment of neutropenia associated with collagen vascular disease.  Curr Opin Hematol . 1997;4(3):196-9. PMID: 9209836  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9209836 . Sweeney SE, Harris ED, Firestein GS. Clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 WBC count 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia