
 Female pattern baldness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Female pattern baldness is the most common type of  hair loss  in women. Causes 
 
 Each strand of hair sits in a tiny hole (cavity) in the skin called a follicle. In general, baldness occurs when the hair follicle shrinks over time, resulting in shorter and finer hair. Eventually, the follicle does not grow new hair. The follicles remain alive, which suggests that it is still possible to grow new hair. The reason for female pattern baldness is not well understood, but may be related to: Aging Changes in the levels of androgens (male hormones). For example, after reaching  menopause , many women find that the hair on their head is thinner, while the hair on their face is coarser. Family history of male or female pattern baldness.  Symptoms 
 
 Hair thinning is different from that of male pattern baldness. In female pattern baldness: Hair thins mainly on the top and crown of the scalp. It usually starts with a widening through the center hair part. The front hairline remains unaffected except for normal recession, which happens to everyone as time passes. The hair loss rarely progresses to total or near total baldness, as it may in men. Itching or skin sores on the scalp are generally not seen. Exams and Tests 
 
 Female pattern baldness is usually diagnosed based on: Ruling out other causes of hair loss. The appearance and pattern of hair loss. Your medical history.  The health care provider will examine you for other signs of too much male hormone (androgen), such as: Abnormal new hair growth, such as on the face or between the belly button and pubic area Changes in menstrual periods and enlargement of the clitoris New acne  A  skin biopsy  of the scalp or blood tests may be used to diagnose skin disorders that cause hair loss. Looking at the hair under a microsope may be done to check for problems with the structure of the hair shaft itself. Treatment 
 
 
Untreated,  hair loss  in female pattern baldness is permanent. In most cases, hair loss is mild to moderate. You do not need treatment if you are comfortable with your appearance. MEDICINES The only medicine approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat female pattern baldness is minoxidil: It is applied to the scalp. For women, the 2% solution or 5% foam is recommended. Minoxidil may help hair grow in about 1 in 4 or 5 of women. In most women, it may slow or stop hair loss. You must continue to use this medicine for a long time. Hair loss starts again when you stop using it. Also, the hair that it helps grow will fall out. If minoxidil does not work, your provider may recommend other medicines, such as spironolactone, cimetidine, birth control pills, ketoconazole, among others. Your provider can tell you more about these if needed.  HAIR TRANSPLANT During hair transplant, tiny plugs of hair are removed from areas where hair is thicker, and placed (transplanted) in areas that are balding. Minor scarring may occur where hair is removed. There is a slight risk of skin infection. You will likely need many transplants, which can be expensive. However, the results are often excellent and permanent. OTHER SOLUTIONS Hair weaving, hairpieces, or a change in hairstyle can help hide hair loss and improve your appearance. This is often the least expensive and safest way to deal with female pattern baldness. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Female pattern  baldness  is usually not a sign of an underlying medical disorder.  Hair loss may affect self-esteem and cause anxiety.  Hair loss is usually permanent.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have  hair loss  and it continues, especially if you also have  itching , skin irritation, or other symptoms. There might be a treatable medical cause for the hair loss. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for female pattern baldness. Alternative Names 
 
 Alopecia in women; Baldness - female; Hair loss in women; Androgenetic alopecia in women; Hereditary balding or thinning in women Images 
 
 
 Female-pattern baldness 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Hair diseases. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 24. Marks JG, Miller JJ. Hair disorders. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 20. Tosti A. Diseases of hair and nails. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 442. Read More 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hair loss 
 Male pattern baldness 
 Menopause 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hair Loss 
 Browse the Encyclopedia