
 Femoral hernia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A  hernia  occurs when the contents of the abdomen push through a weak point or tear the thin muscle wall of the belly. This layer of muscle holds the abdominal organs in place. A hernia most often occurs in the small intestine area.  A femoral hernia is a bulge in the upper part of the thigh near the groin. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, there is no clear cause of a hernia. Some hernias may be present at birth (congenital), but are not noticed until later in life. Some factors that contribute to the development of a hernia include: Chronic  constipation Chronic  cough Heavy lifting Obesity Straining to urinate because of an  enlarged prostate Femoral hernias tend to occur more often in women than in men. Symptoms 
 
 You may see a bulge in the upper thigh just below the groin. Most femoral hernias cause no symptoms. You may have some groin discomfort. It may be worse when you stand, lift heavy objects, or strain. Sometimes, the first symptoms are: Sudden groin pain Abdominal pain Nausea Vomiting This may mean that the intestine within the hernia is blocked. This is an emergency. Exams and Tests 
 
 The best way to tell if there is a hernia is to have your health care provider perform a physical exam. If there is any doubt about the exam findings, an  ultrasound  or  CT scan  may be helpful. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the symptoms present with the hernia. If you feel sudden pain in your groin, a piece of intestine may be stuck in the hernia. This is called an incarcerated hernia. This problem needs treatment right away in a hospital emergency room. You may need emergency surgery. When you have ongoing discomfort from a femoral hernia, talk to your provider about your treatment choices. Hernias often get larger as time passes. They do not go away on their own.  Compared to other types of hernias, femoral hernias more commonly are incarcerate.  Your surgeon may recommend  femoral hernia repair surgery . The surgery is done to avoid a possible medical emergency. If you do not have surgery right away: Increase your fiber intake and drink fluids to avoid constipation. Lose weight if you are overweight. See your provider if you have trouble urinating (men). Use proper lifting techniques.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The chances of a femoral hernia coming back after surgery are low. If the intestine or other tissue becomes stuck, a portion of the intestine may need to be removed. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider or local emergency number (911) or go to the emergency room right away if: You suddenly develop pain in the hernia, and the hernia cannot be pushed back into the abdomen using gentle pressure. You develop nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain. Your hernia becomes red, purple, dark, or discolored.  Call your provider if you have a bulge in the upper thigh next to the groin. Prevention 
 
   Alternative Names 
 
 Femorocele; Enteromerocele; Crural hernia Images 
 
 
 Inguinal hernia 
 Femoral hernia 
 References 
 
 Blatnik JA, Rosen MJ. Femoral hernia repair. In: Delaney CP, Goldstone J, Hardacre JM, et al, eds.  Netter's Surgical Anatomy and Approaches . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 30. Malangoni MA, Rosen MJ. Hernias. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Femoral hernia repair 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hernia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia