
 Fibrocystic breast disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fibrocystic breast disease is a common way to describe painful, lumpy breasts.   Causes 
 
 The exact cause of the condition is not known. Hormones made in the ovaries may make a woman's breasts feel swollen, lumpy, or painful before or during menstruation each month. Up to half of women have this condition at some time during their life. It is most common between the ages of 20 and 45. It is rare in women after menopause unless they are taking estrogen. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are more often worse right before your menstrual period. They tend to get better after your period starts. If you have heavy, irregular periods, your symptoms may be worse. If you take birth control pills, you may have fewer symptoms. In most cases, symptoms get better after menopause. Symptoms may include:  Pain or discomfort in both breasts Pain that commonly comes and goes with your period, but may last through the whole month Breasts that feel full, swollen, or heavy Pain or discomfort under the arms Thick or lumpy breasts  You may have a lump in the same area of the breast that becomes larger before each period and shrinks afterward. This type of lump moves when it is pushed with your fingers. It does not feel stuck or fixed to the tissue around it. This type of lump is common with fibrocystic breasts. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. This will include a breast exam. Tell your provider if you have noticed any breast changes.  If you are over 40, ask your provider how often you should have a  mammogram  to screen for breast cancer. For women under 35, a  breast ultrasound  may be used to look more closely at breast tissue. You may need further tests if a lump was found during a breast exam or your mammogram result was abnormal. Another mammogram and breast ultrasound may be done.  Treatment 
 
 Women who have no symptoms or only mild symptoms DO NOT need treatment. Your provider may recommend the following self-care measures: Take over-the-counter medicine, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen for pain Apply heat or ice on the breast Wear a well-fitting bra or a sports bra Some women believe that eating less fat, caffeine, or chocolate helps with their symptoms. There is no evidence that these measures help. Vitamin E, thiamine, magnesium, and evening primrose oil are not harmful in most cases. Studies have not shown these to be helpful. Talk with your provider before taking any medicine or supplement. For more severe symptoms, your provider may prescribe hormones, such as  birth control pills  or other medicine. Take the medicine exactly as instructed. Be sure to let your provider know if you have side effects from the medicine. Surgery is never done to treat this condition. But if you have a lump that is suspicious, your provider may recommend a  biopsy . In this test, a small amount of tissue is removed from the lump and examined under a microscope. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If your breast exams and mammograms are normal, you DO NOT need to worry about your symptoms. Fibrocystic breast changes DO NOT increase your risk of breast cancer. Symptoms usually improve after menopause. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you: You find new or different lumps during your  breast self-exam . You have new discharge from the nipple or any discharge that is bloody or clear. You have redness or puckering of the skin, or flattening or indentation of the nipple. Alternative Names 
 
 Fibrocystic breast disease; Mammary dysplasia; Diffuse cystic mastopathy; Benign breast disease; Glandular breast changes; Cystic changes; Chronic cystic mastitis; Breast lump - fibrocystic Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 Fibrocystic breast disease 
 References 
 
 Alvero R. Fibrocystic breast disease. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2017 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:474-474. Bope ET, Kellerman RD. Women's health. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Hunt KK, Mittendorf EA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 34. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Benign breast problems and conditions. ACOG Web site.  www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Benign-Breast-Problems-and-Conditions . Accessed December 02, 2016. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Caffeine in the diet 
 Incidence 
 Menopause 
 
 Review Date 11/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia