
 Fibrous dysplasia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fibrous dysplasia is a bone disease that destroys and replaces normal bone with fibrous bone tissue. One or more bones can be affected. Causes 
 
 Fibrous dysplasia occurs in childhood, usually between ages 3 and 15. The condition is linked to a problem with genes (gene mutation) that control bone-producing cells. The mutation occurs when a baby is developing in the womb. The condition is not passed from parent to child. 
 Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bone pain Bone sores (lesions) Difficulty walking Endocrine (hormone) gland problems Fractures or bone deformities (rare) Unusual skin color (pigmentation), which occurs with  McCune-Albright syndrome The bone lesions may stop when the child reaches puberty. Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical examination. X-rays of bones are taken. Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for fibrous dysplasia. Bone fractures or deformities are treated as needed. Hormone problems will need to be treated. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the severity of the condition and the symptoms that occur. Possible Complications 
 
 Depending on the bones that are affected, health problems that may result include: If skull bone is affected, there can be vision or hearing loss If a leg bone is affected, there can be difficulty walking and joint problems such as  arthritis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has symptoms of this condition, such as repeated bone fractures and unexplained bone deformity. Specialists in orthopedics, endocrinology, and genetics may be involved in your child's diagnosis and care. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent fibrous dysplasia. Treatment aims to prevent complications, such as recurrent bone fractures, to help make the condition less severe. Alternative Names 
 
 Inflammatory fibrous hyperplasia; Idiopathic fibrous hyperplasia Images 
 
 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 
Blanco P, Wientroub S. Fibrous dysplasia. In: Glorieus FH, Perrifor JM, Juppner H, eds.  Pediatric Bone.  2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 22. Czerniak B. Fibrous dysplasia and related lesions. In: Czerniak B, ed.  Bone Tumors.  2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 8. Read More 
 
 Acromegaly 
 Cushing disease 
 Endocrine glands 
 Gigantism 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 McCune-Albright syndrome 
 Rickets 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia