
 Fluorescein eye stain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This is a test that uses orange dye (fluorescein) and a blue light to detect foreign bodies in the eye. This test can also detect damage to the cornea. The cornea is the outer surface of the eye. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A piece of blotting paper containing the dye is touched to the surface of your eye. You are asked to blink. Blinking spreads the dye and coats the tear film covering the surface of the cornea. The tear film contains water, oil, and mucus to protect and lubricate the eye. The health care provider then shines a blue light at your eye. Any problems on the surface of the cornea will be stained by the dye and appear green under the blue light. The provider can determine the location and likely cause of the cornea problem depending on the size, location, and shape of the staining. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will need to remove your eyeglasses or contact lenses before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 If your eyes are very dry, the blotting paper may be slightly scratchy. The dye may cause a mild and brief stinging sensation. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is to: Find scratches or other problems with the surface of the cornea  Reveal foreign bodies on the eye surface  Determine if there is irritation of the cornea after contacts are prescribed Normal Results 
 
 If the test result is normal, the dye remains in the tear film on the surface of the eye and does not stick to the eye itself. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may point to: Abnormal tear production (dry eye) Blocked tear duct Corneal abrasion  (a scratch on the surface of the cornea) Foreign bodies, such as eyelashes or dust ( eye - foreign object in ) Infection Injury or trauma Severe dry eye associated with arthritis (keratoconjunctivitis sicca)  Risks 
 
 If the dye touches the skin, there may be a slight, brief, discoloration. Images 
 
 
 Fluorescent eye test 
 References 
 
 Prokopich CL, Hrynchak P, Elliott DB, Glanagan JG. Ocular health assessment. In: Elliott DB, ed.  Clinical Procedures in Primary Eye Care . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 7. Read More 
 
 Blocked tear duct 
 Corneal injury 
 Eye - foreign object in 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Corneal Disorders 
 Eye Diseases 
 Eye Injuries 
 Browse the Encyclopedia