
 Folate-deficiency anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
Folate-deficiency anemia is a decrease in red blood cells (anemia) due to a lack of folate. Folate is a type of B vitamin. It is also called folic acid.  Anemia  is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. Causes 
 
 Folate (folic acid) is needed for red blood cells to form and grow. You can get folate by eating green leafy vegetables and liver. However, your body does not store folate in large amounts. So, you need to eat plenty of folate-rich foods to maintain normal levels of this vitamin. In  folate-deficiency  anemia, the red blood cells are abnormally large. Such cells are called megalocytes. They are also called megaloblasts. They are seen in the bone marrow. That is why this anemia is also called megaloblastic anemia. Causes of this type of anemia include: Too little folic acid in your diet Hemolytic anemia Long-term  alcoholism Use of certain medicines (such as phenytoin [Dilantin], methotrexate, sulfasalazine, triamterene, pyrimethamine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and barbiturates)  The following raise your risk for this type of anemia: Alcoholism Eating overcooked food Poor diet (often seen in the poor, the older people, and people who do not eat fresh fruits or vegetables) Pregnancy  Folic acid is needed to help a baby in the womb grow properly. Too little  folic acid during pregnancy  may lead to birth defects in a baby.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Fatigue Headache Pallor Sore mouth and tongue  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count  (CBC) Red blood cell folate level  Rarely, a  bone marrow examination  may be done.  Treatment 
 
 The goal is to identify and treat the cause of the folate deficiency. You may receive folic acid supplements by mouth or through a vein. If you have low folate levels because of a problem with your intestines, you may need treatment for the rest of your life.  Diet changes can help boost your folate level. Eat more green, leafy vegetables and citrus fruits. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Anemia most often responds well to treatment within 2 months. Possible Complications 
 
 Symptoms of anemia can cause discomfort. In pregnant women, folate deficiency has been associated with neural tube or spinal defects (such as  spina bifida ) in the infant. Other, more severe complications may include: Curly graying hair Increased skin color (pigment) Infertility Worsening of heart disease or  heart failure When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of folate deficiency anemia. Prevention 
 
 Eating plenty of folate-rich foods can help prevent this condition.  Experts recommend that women take 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day before they get pregnant and through the first 3 months of their pregnancy. Images 
 
 
 Megaloblastic anemia - view of red blood cells 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 164. Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr., Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 37. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Folate deficiency 
 Malabsorption 
 Myelomeningocele 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Folic Acid 
 Browse the Encyclopedia