
 Fontanelles - sunken 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sunken fontanelles are an obvious curving in of the "soft spot" in an infant's head. Considerations 
 
 The skull is made up of many bones. There are 8 bones in the skull itself and 14 bones in the face area. They join together to form a solid, bony cavity that protects and supports the brain. The areas where the bones join together are called the sutures. The bones are not joined together firmly at birth. This allows the head to change shape to help it pass through the birth canal. The sutures gradually gain minerals and harden, firmly joining the skull bones together. This process is called ossification. In an infant, the space where two sutures join forms a membrane-covered "soft spot" called a fontanelle (fontanel). The fontanelles allow the brain and skull to grow during an infant's first year. There are normally several fontanelles on a newborn's skull. They are located mainly at the top, back, and sides of the head. Like the sutures, fontanelles harden over time and become closed, solid, bony areas. The fontanelle in the back of the head (posterior fontanelle) most often closes by the time an infant is 1 or 2 months old. The fontanelle at the top of the head ( anterior  fontanelle) most often closes within 7 to 19 months.  The fontanelles should feel firm and should curve inward slightly to the touch. A noticeably sunken fontanelle is a sign that the infant does not have enough fluid in his or her body. Causes 
 
 Dehydration  (not enough fluid in the body) Malnutrition When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 A sunken fontanelle can be a medical emergency. A health care provider should check the infant right away. What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The provider will perform a  physical exam  and ask questions about the child's symptoms and medical history, such as: When did you first notice that the fontanelle looked sunken? How severe is it? How would you describe it? Which "soft spots" are affected? What other symptoms are present? Has the baby been ill, especially with  vomiting ,  diarrhea , or excessive sweating? Is the  skin turgor  poor? Is the baby thirsty? Is the baby alert? Are the baby's eyes dry? Is the baby's mouth moist?  Tests may include: Blood chemistries CBC Urinalysis Tests to check the baby's nutritional status  You might be referred to a place that can provide intravenous (IV) fluids if the sunken fontanelle is caused by dehydration. Alternative Names 
 
 Sunken fontanelles; Soft spot - sunken Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 Sunken fontanelles (superior view) 
 References 
 
 Carlo W. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88.  Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Cranial sutures 
 Fontanelles - bulging 
 Fontanelles - enlarged 
 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia