
 Fontanelles - enlarged 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Enlarged fontanelles are larger than expected soft spots for the age of a baby.  The skull of an infant or young child is made up of bony plates that allow for growth of the skull. The borders at which these plates intersect are called sutures or suture lines. The spaces where these connect, but are not completely joined, are called soft spots or fontanelles (fontanel or fonticulus). Considerations 
 
 Fontanelles allow for growth of the skull during an infant's first year. Slow or incomplete closure of the skull bones is most often the cause of a wide fontanelle. Causes 
 
 Larger than normal fontanelles are most commonly caused by: Down syndrome Hydrocephalus Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) Premature birth Rarer causes: Achondroplasia Apert syndrome Cleidocranial dysostosis Congenital rubella Neonatal hypothyroidism Osteogenesis imperfecta Rickets  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you think that the fontanelles on your baby's head are larger than they should be, talk to your health care provider. Most of the time, this sign will have been seen during the baby's first medical exam. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 An enlarged large fontanelle is almost always found by the health care provider during a physical exam.  The provider will examine the child and measure the child's head around the largest area.  The doctor may also turn off the lights and shine a bright light over the child's head. Your baby's soft spot will be regularly checked at each well-child visit. Blood tests and imaging tests of the head may be done.  Alternative Names 
 
 Soft spot - large; Newborn care - enlarged fontanelle; Neonatal care - enlarged fontanelle Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 Fontanelles 
 Large fontanelles (lateral view) 
 Large fontanelles 
 References 
 
 Haddad J, Keesecker S. Congenital malformations. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 638. Robinson S, Cohen AR. Disorders of the head shape and size. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Cranial sutures 
 Fontanelles - bulging 
 Fontanelles - sunken 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia