
 Fontanelles - bulging 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bulging fontanelle is an outward curving of an infant's soft spot (fontanelle). Considerations 
 
 The skull is made up of many bones, 8 in the skull itself and 14 in the face area. They join together to form a solid, bony cavity that protects and supports the brain. The areas where the bones join together are called the sutures. The bones are not joined together firmly at birth. This allows the head to change shape to help it pass through the birth canal. The sutures get minerals added to them over time and harden, firmly joining the skull bones together. In an infant, the space where two sutures join forms a membrane-covered "soft spot" called a fontanelle (fontanel). The fontanelles allow for growth of the brain and skull during an infant's first year. There are normally several fontanelles on a newborn's skull. They are located mainly at the top, back, and sides of the head. Like the sutures, fontanelles harden over time and become closed, solid bony areas. The fontanelle in the back of the head (posterior fontanelle) most often closes by the time an infant is 1 to 2 months old. The fontanelle at the top of the head ( anterior  fontanelle) most often closes between 7 to 19 months.  The fontanelles should feel firm and very slightly curved inward to the touch. A tense or bulging fontanelle occurs when fluid builds up in the brain or the brain swells, causing increased pressure inside the skull. When the infant is crying, lying down, or vomiting, the fontanelles may look like they are bulging. However, they should return to normal when the infant is in a calm, head-up position. Causes 
 
 Encephalitis . Swelling (inflammation) of the brain, most often due to infections. Hydrocephalus . A buildup of fluid inside the skull. Increased intracranial pressure Meningitis . Infection of the membranes covering the brain.  Home Care 
 
 If the fontanelle returns to normal appearance when the child is calm and head-up, it is not a truly bulging fontanelle. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Immediate, emergency care is needed for any infant who has a truly bulging fontanelle, especially if it occurs along with fever or excess drowsiness. What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The provider will perform a  physical exam  and ask questions about the child's medical history, such as: Does the "soft spot" return to normal appearance when the infant is calm or head-up? Does it bulge all the time or does it come and go? When did you first notice this? Which fontanelles bulge (top of the head, back of the head, or other)? Are all the fontanelles bulging? What other symptoms are present (such as  fever ,  irritability , or  lethargy )?  Diagnostic tests that may be done are: CT scan of the head MRI scan of the head Spinal tap ( lumbar puncture )  Alternative Names 
 
 Soft spot - bulging; Bulging fontanelles Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 Bulging fontanelles 
 References 
 
 Carlo W. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88. Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Cranial sutures 
 Fontanelles - enlarged 
 Fontanelles - sunken 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia