
 Foreign object - inhaled or swallowed 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 If you breathe a foreign object into your nose, mouth, or  respiratory  tract, it may become stuck and cause breathing problems or  choking . It can also lead to inflammation and infection. If you swallow a foreign object, it can get stuck along the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. This can lead to an infection or blockage or tear in the GI tract. Considerations 
 
 Children age 1 to 3 are most like to swallow or breathe in a foreign object. These items may include a coin, marble, pencil eraser, buttons, beads, or other small items or foods. Causes 
 
 Young children can easily breathe in certain foods (such as nuts, seeds, and popcorn) and small objects (such as buttons and beads). This may cause a partial or total  airway blockage . If the object passes through the esophagus (food pipe) and into the stomach without getting stuck, it will probably pass through the entire GI tract. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Choking Coughing No breathing or breathing trouble (respiratory distress) Wheezing Sometimes, only minor symptoms are seen at first. The object may be forgotten until symptoms such as inflammation or infection develop. First Aid 
 
 FOR AN INHALED OBJECT Any child who may have breathed in (inhaled) an object should be seen by a doctor. Children with obvious breathing trouble may have a total airway blockage that requires emergency medical help. If choking or coughing goes away, and the child does not have any other symptoms, he or she should be watched for signs and symptoms of infection or irritation. X-rays may be needed. Bronchoscopy  may be needed to confirm the diagnosis and to remove the object. Antibiotics and breathing therapy may be needed if an infection develops. FOR A SWALLOWED OBJECT Any child who is believed to have swallowed a foreign object should be watched for pain, fever, vomiting, or local tenderness. Stools (bowel movements) should be checked to see if the object has passed through the body. This may sometimes cause rectal or anal bleeding. Sharp objects, such as pins and screws, usually pass through the GI tract without complications. X-rays are sometimes needed, especially if the child has pain or the object does not pass within 4 to 5 days. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) may be needed to confirm the diagnosis and remove the object. This procedure involves placing a tube through the mouth into the GI tract.  In severe cases, surgery may be needed to remove the object. DO NOT 
 
 DO NOT force feed infants who are crying or breathing rapidly. This may cause the baby to inhale liquid or solid food into their airway. 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call a health care provider or local emergency number (such as 911) if you think a child has inhaled or swallowed a foreign object. Prevention 
 
 Preventive measures include: Cut food into appropriate sizes for small children. Teach them how to chew well.  Discourage talking, laughing, or playing while food is in the mouth. Do not give potentially dangerous foods such as hot dogs, whole grapes, nuts, popcorn, or hard candy to children under age 3. Keep small objects out of the reach of young children. Teach children to avoid placing foreign objects into their noses and other body openings. Alternative Names 
 
 Obstructed airway; Blocked airway Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Heimlich maneuver on adult 
 Heimlich maneuver on an adult 
 Heimlich maneuver on oneself 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 Heimlich maneuver on infant 
 Heimlich maneuver on conscious child 
 Heimlich maneuver on conscious child 
 References 
 
 Cukor J, Manno M. Pediatric respiratory emergencies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 168. Munter DW. Esophageal foreign bodies. In: Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 39. Thomas SH, Goodloe JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Abdominal thrusts 
 Respiratory 
 
 Review Date 1/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Choking 
 Foreign Bodies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia