
 Foreign body in the nose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article discusses first aid for a foreign object placed into the nose. Considerations 
 
 Curious young children may insert small objects into their nose in a normal attempt to explore their own bodies. Potential objects placed in the nose may include food, seeds, dried beans, small toys (such as marbles), crayon pieces, erasers, paper wads, cotton, and beads. A foreign body in a child's nose can be there for awhile without a parent being aware of the problem. The object may only be discovered when visiting a health care provider to find the cause of irritation, bleeding, infection, or difficulty breathing. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms that your child may have a foreign body in his or her nose include:  Difficulty breathing  through the affected nostril Feeling of something in the nose Foul-smelling or bloody  nasal discharge Irritability, particularly in infants Irritation or pain in the nose  First Aid 
 
 DO NOT search the nose with cotton swabs or other tools. This may push the object further into the nose.  DO NOT use tweezers or other tools to remove an object that is stuck deep inside the nose. DO NOT try to remove an object that you cannot see or one that is not easy to grasp. This can push the object farther in or cause damage.  Have the person breathe through the mouth. The person should not breathe in sharply. This may force the object in further.  Gently press and close the nostril that does NOT have the object in it. Ask the person to blow gently. This may help push the object out.  Avoid blowing the nose too hard or repeatedly.  If this method fails, get medical help.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help right away if: The person cannot breathe well Bleeding occurs and continues for more than 2 or 3 minutes after you remove the foreign object, despite placing gentle pressure on the nose An object is stuck in both nostrils You cannot easily remove a foreign object from the person's nose You think an infection has developed in the nostril where the object is stuck Prevention 
 
 Prevention measures may include: Cut food into appropriate sizes for small children. Discourage talking, laughing, or playing while food is in the mouth. Do not give foods such as hot dogs, whole grapes, nuts, popcorn, or hard candy to children under age 3. Keep small objects out of the reach of young children. Teach children to avoid placing foreign objects into their noses and other body openings.  Alternative Names 
 
 Something stuck in the nose; Objects in the nose Images 
 
 
 Nasal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Cukor J, Manno M. Pediatric respiratory emergencies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 168. Thomas SH, Goodloe JM. Foreign bodies. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 60.  
 Review Date 1/12/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foreign Bodies 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia