
 Fractured clavicle in the newborn 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A fractured clavicle in the newborn is a broken collar bone in a baby that was just delivered. Causes 
 
 A fracture of a newborn's collar bone (clavicle) can occur during a difficult vaginal delivery. Symptoms 
 
 The baby will not move the painful, injured arm. Instead, the baby will hold it still against the side of the body. Lifting the baby under the arms causes the child pain. Sometimes, the fracture can be felt with the fingers, but the problem often can't be seen or felt. Within a few weeks, a hard lump may develop where the bone is healing. This lump may be the only sign that the newborn had a broken collar bone. Exams and Tests 
 
 A chest x-ray will show whether or not there is a broken bone. Treatment 
 
 Generally, there is no treatment other than lifting the child gently to prevent discomfort. Occasionally, the arm on the affected side may be immobilized, most often by simply pinning the sleeve to the clothes. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Full recovery occurs without treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Most often, there are no complications. Because infants heal well, it may be impossible (even by x-ray) to tell that a fracture occurred. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if your baby acts uncomfortable when you lift him or her. Alternative Names 
 
 Fractured collar bone - newborn; Broken collar bone - newborn   Images 
 
 
 Fractured clavicle (infant) 
 References 
 
 Carol WA. Delivery room emergencies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 100. White KK, Goldberg MJ. Common neonatal orthopedic ailments. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 96. 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Childbirth Problems 
 Shoulder Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia