
 Friedreich ataxia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Friedreich ataxia is a rare disease passed down through families (inherited). It affects the muscles and heart. Causes 
 
 Friedreich ataxia is caused by a defect in a gene called frataxin (FXN). Changes in this gene cause the body to make too much of a part of DNA called trinucleotide repeat (GAA). Normally, the body contains about 8 to 30 copies of GAA. People with Friedreich ataxia have as many as 1,000 copies. The more copies of GAA a person has, the earlier in life the disease starts and the faster it gets worse. Friedreich ataxia is an  autosomal recessive  genetic disorder. This means you must get a copy of the defective gene from both your mother and father. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are caused by the wearing away of structures in areas of the brain and spinal cord that control coordination, muscle movement, and other functions. Symptoms most often begin before puberty. Symptoms may include: Abnormal speech Changes in vision, particularly color vision Decrease in ability to feel vibrations in lower limbs Foot problems, such as  hammer toe  and  high arches Hearing loss, this occurs in about 10% of people Jerky eye movements Loss of coordination  and balance, which leads to frequent falls Muscle weakness No reflexes in the legs Unsteady gait  and uncoordinated movements ( ataxia ), which gets worse with time  Muscle problems lead to changes in the spine. This may result in  scoliosis  or  kyphoscoliosis . Heart disease most often develops and may lead to  heart failure . Heart failure or  dysrhythmias  that do not respond to treatment may result in death.  Diabetes  may develop in later stages of the disease. Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be done: ECG Electrophysiological studies EMG  (electromyography) Genetic testing Nerve conduction tests Muscle biopsy X-ray ,  CT  scan, or  MRI of the head X-ray of the chest X-ray of the spine Blood sugar (glucose) tests may show diabetes or glucose intolerance. An eye exam may show damage to the optic nerve, which most often occurs without symptoms. Treatment 
 
 Treatment for Friedreich ataxia includes: Counseling Speech therapy Physical therapy Walking aids or wheelchairs  Orthopedic devices (braces) may be needed for scoliosis and foot problems. Treating heart disease and diabetes help people live longer and improve their quality of life.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Friedreich ataxia slowly gets worse and causes problems doing everyday activities. Most people need to use a wheelchair within 15 years of the disease's start. The disease may lead to early death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Diabetes Heart failure or heart disease Loss of ability to move around  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms of Friedreich ataxia occur, especially if there is a family history of the disorder. Prevention 
 
 People with a family history of Friedreich ataxia who intend to have children may want to consider genetic screening to determine their risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Friedreich's ataxia; Spinocerebellar degeneration Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Mink JW. Movement disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 597. Warner WC, Sawyer JR. Scoliosis and kyphosis. In: Azar FM, Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 44. Read More 
 
 Autosomal recessive 
 
 Review Date 12/9/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Friedreich's Ataxia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia