
 Fungal arthritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Fungal arthritis is swelling and irritation (inflammation) of a joint by a fungal infection. It is also called mycotic arthritis. Causes 
 
 Fungal arthritis is a rare condition. It can be caused by any of the invasive types of fungi. The infection can result from an infection in another organ, such as the lungs. People with weakened immune systems who travel or live in areas where the fungi are common, are more susceptible to most causes of fungal arthritis. Conditions that can cause fungal arthritis include: Blastomycosis Candidiasis Coccidioidomycosis Cryptococcosis Histoplasmosis Sporotrichosis 
   Exserohilum rostratum  (from injection with contaminated steroid vials) Symptoms 
 
 The fungus can affect bone or joint tissue. One or more joints can be affected, most often the large, weight-bearing joints, such as the knees. Symptoms may include any of the following: Fever Joint pain Joint stiffness Joint swelling Swelling of the ankles, feet, and legs Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. Tests that may be ordered include: Culture of joint fluid  that grows fungus Joint x-ray  showing joint changes Positive antibody test (serology) for fungal disease Synovial biopsy  showing fungus Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection using antifungal drugs. Commonly used antifungal drugs are amphotericin B or drugs in the azole family (fluconazole, ketoconazole, or itraconazole).  
 Chronic or advanced bone or joint infection may require surgery (debridement) to remove the infected tissue. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the underlying cause of the infection and the your overall health. A weakened immune system, cancer, and certain medicines can affect the outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Joint damage may occur if the infection is not treated right away. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you have any symptoms of fungal arthritis. Prevention 
 
 Thorough treatment of fungal infections elsewhere in the body may help prevent fungal arthritis. Alternative Names 
 
 Mycotic arthritis; Infectious arthritis - fungal References 
 
 Marquez J, Espinoza LR. Infectious arthritis II: mycobacterial, brucellar, fungal, and parasitic arthritis. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 108. Ohl CA, Forster D. Infectious arthritis of native joints. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 105. Read More 
 
 Blastomycosis 
 Cryptococcosis 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Joint pain 
 Sporotrichosis 
 Vaginal yeast infection 
 Valley fever 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 Infectious Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia