
 Funnel-web spider bite 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article describes the effects of a bite from the funnel-web spider. Male funnel-web spiders are more poisonous than females. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage a bite from this type of spider. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The venom in the funnel-web spider contains the poison. Where Found 
 
 Funnel-web spiders are found in southeast Australia, around Sydney. They are not native to the United States, although some people may keep them as exotic pets. Symptoms 
 
 Funnel-web spider bites are very painful and dangerous. They have been known to cause these symptoms in different parts of the body: Eyes, ears, nose, and throat Drooling Drooping eyelids Double vision Swallowing difficulty Tingling or numbness in the mouth or lips within 10 to 15 minutes  Heart and blood Collapse Rapid heart rate  Lungs Difficulty breathing  Muscles and joints Joint pain Severe muscle spasms, usually in the legs and belly area  Nervous system Agitation Confusion Coma Headache Numbness of mouth and lips Tremors Shivering (chills)  Skin Heavy sweating Redness around the site of the bite  Stomach and intestines Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Funnel-web spider bites are very poisonous. Seek medical help right away. Call the Poison Control Center for guidance.  Follow these steps until medical help is given: Apply a bandage and put firm pressure over the bite. Keep the affected area still, if possible, to prevent the venom from spreading. A homemade splint may be helpful if the bite was on the arms, legs, hands, or feet. Loosen clothing and remove rings and other tight jewelry. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Time the bite occurred Type of spider, if possible  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The wound will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Antivenin, a medicine to reverse the effects of the venom, if available Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Funnel-web spider bites can be life threatening, especially in children. They must be treated quickly with antivenin by an experienced provider. Even with appropriate and quick treatment, symptoms may last for several days to weeks. Images 
 
 
 Arthropods, basic features 
 Arachnids, basic features 
 References 
 
 Boyer LV, Greta J. Binford GJ, Degan JA. Spider bites. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 52. Nogar JN, Clark RF. Arthropod bites and stings. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 140. Otten EJ. Venomous animal bites. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. 
 Review Date 7/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spider Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia