
 Gallbladder removal - laparoscopic 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Laparoscopic gallbladder removal is surgery to remove the gallbladder using a medical device called a laparoscope. Description 
 
 Surgery using a laparoscope is the most common way to remove the gallbladder. A laparoscope is a thin, lighted tube that lets the doctor see inside your belly. Gallbladder removal surgery is done while you are under  general anesthesia  so you will be asleep and pain-free. To perform the surgery: The operation is done the following way: The surgeon makes 3 to 4 small cuts in your belly. The laparoscope is inserted through one of the cuts. Other medical instruments are inserted through the other cuts. Gas is pumped into your belly to expand the space. This gives the surgeon more room to see and work. The gallbladder is then removed using the laparoscope and other instruments. An x-ray called a  cholangiogram  may be done during your surgery.  To do this test, dye is injected into your common bile duct and an x-ray picture is taken. The dye helps find stones that may be outside your gallbladder. If other stones are found, the surgeon may remove them with a special instrument.  Sometimes the surgeon cannot safely take out the gallbladder using a laparoscope. In this case, the surgeon will use  open surgery , in which a larger cut is made.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 You may need this surgery if you have pain or other symptoms from  gallstones . You may also need it if your gallbladder is not working normally.  Common symptoms may include: Indigestion , including bloating, heartburn, and gas Pain after eating, usually in the upper right or upper middle area of your belly (epigastric pain) Nausea and vomiting Most people have a quicker recovery and fewer problems with laparoscopic surgery than with open surgery.  Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general include: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding ,  blood clots Infection  Risks for gallbladder surgery include: Damage to the blood vessels that go to the liver Injury to the common bile duct Injury to the small intestine Pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas)  Before the Procedure 
 
 You may have the following tests done before your surgery: Blood tests ( complete blood count ,  electrolytes , and kidney tests) Chest x-ray  or  electrocardiogram  (EKG), for some people Several x-rays of the gallbladder Ultrasound of the gallbladder  Tell your health care provider: If you are or might be pregnant What medicines, vitamins, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription  During the week before surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that put you at higher risk of bleeding during surgery. Ask your doctor which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Prepare your home  for any problems you might have getting around after the surgery. Your doctor or nurse will tell you when to arrive at the hospital. On the day of surgery: Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take the drugs your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Shower the night before or the morning of your surgery. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 If you do not have any problems, you will be able to go home when you are able to drink liquids easily and your pain can be treated with pain pills. Most people go home on the same day or the day after this surgery. If there were problems during surgery, or if you have bleeding, a lot of pain, or a fever, you may need to stay in the hospital longer. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people recover quickly and have good results from this procedure. Alternative Names 
 
 Cholecystectomy - laparoscopic; Surgery - gallbladder - laparoscopic Images 
 
 
 Gallbladder 
 Gallbladder anatomy 
 Laparoscopic surgery  - series 
 References 
 
 Glasgow RE, Mulvihill SJ. Treatment of gallstone disease: In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 66. Jackson PG, Evans SRT. Biliary system. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 55. Read More 
 
 Acute cholecystitis 
 Chronic cholecystitis 
 Gallbladder removal - open 
 Gallstones 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bland diet 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 When you have nausea and vomiting 
 Review Date 7/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gallbladder Diseases 
 Gallstones 
 Browse the Encyclopedia