
 Gas gangrene 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gas gangrene is a potentially deadly form of tissue death (gangrene) . Causes 
 
 Gas  gangrene  is most often caused by bacteria called  Clostridium perfringens.  It also can be caused by group A streptococcus,  Staphylococcus aureus,  and  Vibrio vulnificus . 
Clostridium is found nearly everywhere. As the bacteria grow inside the body, it makes gas and harmful substances (toxins) that can damage body tissues, cells, and blood vessels. Gas gangrene develops suddenly. It usually occurs at the site of trauma or a recent surgical wound. In some cases, it occurs without an irritating event. People most at risk of gas gangrene usually have blood vessel disease ( atherosclerosis , or hardening of the arteries), diabetes, or colon cancer. Symptoms 
 
 Gas gangrene causes very painful swelling. The skin turns pale to brownish-red. When the swollen area is pressed, gas can be felt as a crackly sensation (crepitus). The edges of the infected area grow so quickly that changes can be seen over minutes. The area may be completely destroyed. Symptoms include: Air under the skin ( subcutaneous emphysema ) Blisters filled with brown-red fluid Drainage from the tissues, foul-smelling brown-red or bloody fluid ( serosanguineous  discharge) Increased heart rate ( tachycardia ) Moderate to high fever Moderate to severe pain around a skin injury Pale skin color, later becoming dusky and changing to dark red or purple Swelling that worsens around a skin injury Sweating Vesicle  formation, combining into large blisters
    Yellow color to the skin (jaundice)  If the condition is not treated, the person can go into  shock  with decreased blood pressure (hypotension),  kidney failure , coma, and finally death. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may reveal signs of shock.  Tests that may be done include:  Tissue and fluid cultures to test for bacteria including clostridial species Blood culture to determine the bacteria causing the infection Gram stain of fluid from the infected area X-ray ,  CT  scan, or  MRI  of the area may show gas in the tissues.  Treatment 
 
 Surgery is needed quickly to remove dead, damaged, and infected tissue. Surgical removal (amputation) of an arm or leg may be needed to control the spread of infection. Amputation sometimes must be done before all test results are available. Antibiotics are also given. These medicines are given through a vein (intravenously). Pain medicines may also be prescribed.  In some cases,  hyperbaric oxygen treatment  may be tried. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Gas gangrene usually begins suddenly and quickly gets worse. It is often deadly. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Coma Delirium Disfiguring or disabling permanent tissue damage Jaundice with liver damage  
 Kidney failure 
  Shock Spread of infection through the body (sepsis) Stupor When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This is an emergency condition requiring immediate medical attention. Call your provider if you have signs of infection around a skin wound. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911), if you have symptoms of gas gangrene. Prevention 
 
 Clean any skin injury thoroughly. Watch for signs of infection (such as redness, pain, drainage, or swelling around a wound). See your provider promptly if these occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Tissue infection - Clostridial; Gangrene - gas; Myonecrosis; Clostridial infection of tissues; Necrotizing soft tissue infection Images 
 
 
 Gas gangrene 
 Gas gangrene 
 Bacteria 
 References 
 
 Henry S. Extremity gas gangrene. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:742-745. Onderdonk AB, Garrett WS. Gas gangrene and other  Clostridium -associated diseases. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 248. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Anaerobic 
 Delirium 
 Necrosis 
 Necrotizing soft tissue infection 
 Shock 
 Stress and your health 
 Systemic 
 Toxins 
 Vasoconstriction 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gangrene 
 Browse the Encyclopedia