
 Gastritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gastritis occurs when the lining of the stomach becomes inflamed or swollen.
 Gastritis can last for only a short time (acute gastritis). It may also linger for months to years (chronic gastritis).
 Causes 
 
 The most common causes of gastritis are:
 Certain medicines, such as aspirin, ibuprofen, or naproxen
   Heavy alcohol drinking
   Infection of the stomach with a bacteria called  Helicobacter pylori Less common causes are:
 Autoimmune disorders (such as pernicious anemia)
   Backflow of bile into the stomach (bile reflux)
   Cocaine abuse
   Eating or drinking caustic or corrosive substances (such as poisons)
   Extreme stress
   Viral infection, such as cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus (more often occurs in people with a weak immune system)
   Trauma or a severe, sudden illness such as major surgery, kidney failure, or being placed on a breathing machine may cause gastritis.
 Symptoms 
 
 Many people with gastritis do not have any symptoms. Symptoms you may notice are: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Pain in the upper part of the belly or abdomen  If gastritis is causing bleeding from the lining of the stomach, symptoms may include: Black stools Vomiting blood  or coffee-ground like material  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be needed are: Complete blood count  (CBC) to check for  anemia  or low blood count Examination of the stomach with an endoscope (esophagogastroduodenoscopy or  EGD ) H. pylori  tests Stool test to check for small amounts of blood in the stools, which may be a sign of bleeding in the stomach  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on what is causing the problem. Some of the causes will go away over time.  You may need to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, or other medicines that may be causing gastritis. Always talk to your health care provider before stopping any medicine.  You may use other over-the-counter and prescription drugs that decrease the amount of acid in the stomach, such as: Antacids H2 antagonists: famotidine (Pepsid), cimetidine (Tagamet), ranitidine (Zantac), and nizatidine (Axid) Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs): omeprazole (Prilosec), esomeprazole (Nexium), iansoprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (AcipHex), and pantoprazole (Protonix)  Antibiotics may be used to treat chronic gastritis caused by infection with  Helicobacter pylori  bacteria. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause, but is often very good. Possible Complications 
 
 Blood loss and increased risk of gastric cancer can occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop: Pain in the upper part of the belly or abdomen that does not go away
   Black or tarry stools
   Vomiting blood or coffee-ground-like material
   Prevention 
 
 Avoid long-term use of substances that can irritate your stomach such as aspirin, anti-inflammatory drugs, or alcohol. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Stomach and stomach lining 
 References 
 
 Kuipers E, Blaser MJ. Acid peptic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 141. Lee EL, Feldman M. Gastritis and gastropathies. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Bile 
 Stomach acid test 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Taking antacids 
 Review Date 1/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Eisner, MD, private practice specializing in gastroenterology, and affiliate assistant professor, Florida Atlantic University School of Medicine, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foodborne Illness 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia