
 Gastrectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gastrectomy is surgery to remove part or all of the stomach. If only part of the stomach is removed, it is called partial gastrectomy If the whole stomach is removed, it is called total gastrectomy  Description 
 
 The surgery is done while you are under  general anesthesia  (asleep and pain-free). The surgeon makes a cut in the abdomen and removes all or part of the stomach, depending on the reason for the procedure. Depending on what part of the stomach was removed, the intestine may need to be re-connected to the remaining stomach (partial gastrectomy) or to the esophagus (total gastrectomy). Today, some surgeons perform gastrectomy using a camera. The surgery, which is called laparoscopy is done with a few small surgical cuts. The advantages of this surgery are a faster recovery, less pain, and only a few small cuts. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This surgery is used to treat stomach problem such as: Bleeding Inflammation Cancer Polyps  Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general include: Reactions to medicines or  breathing problems Bleeding ,  blood clots , or infection  Risks for this surgery include:  Leak from connection to the intestine which can cause infection or abscess The connection to the intestine narrows, causing blockage  Before the Procedure 
 
 If you are a smoker, you should stop smoking several weeks before surgery and not start smoking again after surgery. Smoking slows recovery and increases the risk of problems. Tell your health care provider if you need help quitting. Tell your surgeon or nurse: If you are or might be pregnant What medicines, vitamins, herbs, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription  During the week before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot. Ask your surgeon which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery.  On the day of your surgery: Follow instructions about not eating and drinking. Take the medicines your surgeon told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 How well you do after surgery depends on the reason for the surgery and your condition. After surgery, there may be a tube in your nose which will help keep your stomach empty. It is removed as soon as your bowels are working well. Most people have pain from the surgery. You can control this with pain medicines. You may stay in hospital for 6 to10 days. Ask your surgeon if there are any activities you shouldn't do after you go home. It may take several weeks for you to recover fully. While you are taking narcotic pain medicines, you should not drive. Alternative Names 
 
 Surgery - stomach removal; Gastrectomy - total; Gastrectomy - partial; Stomach cancer - gastrectomy Images 
 
 
 Gastrectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Teitelbaum EN, Hungness ES, Mahvi DM. Stomach. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 48. Yang HK, Kwon S. Laparoscopic gastric surgery. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:1349-1363. 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Stomach Cancer 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia