
 Gastric suction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gastric suction is a procedure to empty the contents of your stomach. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A tube is inserted through your nose or mouth, down the food pipe (esophagus), and into the stomach. Your throat may be numbed with medicine to reduce irritation and gagging caused by the tube. Stomach contents can be removed using suction right away or after spraying water through the tube. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 In an emergency, such as when a person has swallowed poison or is vomiting blood, no preparation is needed for gastric suction. If gastric suction is being done for testing, your health care provider may ask you not to eat overnight or to stop taking certain medicines. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a gagging sensation as the tube is passed. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to: Remove poisons, harmful materials, or excess medicines from the stomach Clean the stomach before an upper endoscopy ( EGD ) if you have been vomiting blood Collect stomach acid Relieve pressure if you have a blockage in the intestines  Risks 
 
 Risks may include: Breathing in contents from the stomach (this is called aspiration)  Hole (perforation) in the esophagus Tube may be placed into the airway instead of the esophagus Minor bleeding Alternative Names 
 
 Gastric lavage; Stomach pumping; Nasogastric tube suction; Bowel obstruction - suction Images 
 
 
 Gastric suction 
 References 
 
 Benson BE, Hoppu K, Troutman WG, et al. Position paper update: gastric lavage for gastrointestinal decontamination.  Clin Toxicol (Phila) . 2013;51(3):140-146. PMID: 23418938  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23418938 . Bope ET, Kellerman RD. Physical and chemical injuries. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 21. 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Stomach Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia