
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition in which the stomach contents leak backwards from the stomach into the esophagus (the tube from the mouth to the stomach). This can irritate the esophagus and cause heartburn and other symptoms. Causes 
 
 When you eat, food passes from the throat to the stomach through the esophagus. A ring of muscle fibers in the lower esophagus prevents swallowed food from moving back up. These muscle fibers are called the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). When this ring of muscle does not close all the way, stomach contents can leak back into the esophagus. This is called reflux or gastroesophageal reflux. Reflux may cause symptoms. Harsh stomach acids can also damage the lining of the esophagus. The risk factors for reflux include: Use of alcohol (possibly) Hiatal hernia (a condition in which part of the stomach moves above the diaphragm, which is the muscle that separates the chest and abdominal cavities) Obesity Pregnancy Scleroderma Smoking  Heartburn and gastroesophageal reflux can be brought on or made worse by pregnancy. Symptoms can also be caused by certain medicines, such as:  Anticholinergics (for example, seasickness medicine) Bronchodilators for asthma Calcium channel blockers for high blood pressure Dopamine-active drugs for  Parkinson disease Progestin for abnormal menstrual bleeding or birth control Sedatives for insomnia or anxiety Tricyclic antidepressants  Talk to your health care provider if you think one of your medicines may be causing heartburn. Never change or stop taking a medicine without first talking to your provider. Watch this video about: Heartburn Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of GERD include: Feeling that food is stuck behind the breastbone Heartburn  or a burning pain in the chest Nausea after eating  Less common symptoms are: Bringing food back up (regurgitation) Cough or wheezing Difficulty swallowing Hiccups Hoarseness  or change in voice Sore throat  Symptoms may get worse when you bend over or lie down, or after you eat. Symptoms may also be worse at night. Exams and Tests 
 
 You may not need any tests if your symptoms are mild. If your symptoms are severe or they come back after you have been treated, your doctor may perform a test called an  upper endoscopy  (EGD). This is a test to examine the lining of the esophagus (the tube that connects your throat to your stomach), stomach, and first part of the small intestine. It is done with a small camera (flexible endoscope) that is inserted down the throat.  You may also need 1 or more of the following tests: A test that measures how often stomach acid enters the tube that leads from the mouth to the stomach (called the esophagus) A test to measure the pressure inside the lower part of the esophagus ( esophageal manometry )  A positive  stool occult blood test  may diagnose bleeding that is coming from the irritation in the esophagus, stomach, or intestines. Treatment 
 
 You can make many  lifestyle changes  to help treat your symptoms. Other tips include: If you are overweight or obese, in many cases, losing weight can help. Avoid drugs such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), or naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn). Take acetaminophen (Tylenol) to relieve pain. Take all of your medicines with plenty of water. When your doctor gives you a new medicine, ask whether it will make your heartburn worse.  You may use  over-the-counter antacids  after meals and at bedtime, although the relief may not last very long. Common side effects of antacids include diarrhea or constipation. Other over-the-counter and prescription drugs can treat GERD. They work more slowly than antacids, but give you longer relief. Your pharmacist, doctor, or nurse can tell you how to take these drugs. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) decrease the amount of acid produced in your stomach H2 blockers also lower the amount of acid released in the stomach  Anti-reflux surgery may be an option for people whose symptoms do not go away with lifestyle changes and medicines. Heartburn and other symptoms should improve after surgery. But you may still need to take drugs for your heartburn. There are also new therapies for reflux that can be performed through an endoscope (a flexible tube passed through the mouth into the stomach). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people respond to lifestyle changes and medicines. However, many people need to continue taking medicines to control their symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Worsening of  asthma A change in the lining of the esophagus that can increase the risk of cancer ( Barrett esophagus ) Bronchospasm (irritation and spasm of the airways due to acid) Chronic cough or hoarseness Dental problems Ulcer  in the esophagus Stricture (a narrowing of the esophagus due to scarring)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms do not improve with lifestyle changes or medicine. Also call if you have:  Bleeding Choking (coughing, shortness of breath) Feeling filled up quickly when eating Frequent vomiting Hoarseness Loss of appetite Trouble swallowing (dysphagia) or pain with swallowing (odynophagia) Weight loss  Prevention 
 
 Following  heartburn prevention techniques  may help prevent symptoms. Obesity is linked to GERD, so maintaining a healthy body weight may help prevent the condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Peptic esophagitis; Reflux esophagitis; GERD; Heartburn - chronic; Dyspepsia - GERD Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 Gastroesophageal reflux - series 
 References 
 
 ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Muthusamy VR, Lightdale JR, et al. The role of endoscopy in the management of GERD.  Gastrointest Endosc . 2015;81(6):1305-1310. PMID: 25863867  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25863867 .
 Falk GW, Katzka DA. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 138. Galmiche JP, Hatlebakk J, Attwood S, et al. Laparoscopic antireflux surgery vs esomeprazole treatment for chronic GERD: the LOTUS randomized controlled trial.  JAMA . 2011;305:1969-1977. PMID: 21586712  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21586712 . Katz PO, Gerson LB, Vela MF. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2013;108:308-28. PMID: 23419381  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23419381 .  Richter JE, Friedenberg FK. Gastroesophageal reflux disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 44. Wang KK, Sampliner RE. Updated guidelines 2008 for the diagnosis, surveillance and therapy of Barrett's esophagus.  Am J Gastroenterol . 2008;103(3):788-797. PMID: 18341497  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18341497 .  Read More 
 
 Anti-reflux surgery 
 Anti-reflux surgery - children 
 Barrett esophagus 
 Erosion 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Anti-reflux surgery - children - discharge  
 Anti-reflux surgery - discharge  
 Gastroesophageal reflux - discharge 
 Heartburn - what to ask your doctor  
 Taking antacids 
 Review Date 1/28/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 GERD 
 Browse the Encyclopedia