
 Gender dysphoria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gender dysphoria occurs when there is a conflict between a person's physical gender and the gender he or she identifies with. For example, a person who is physically a boy may actually feel and act like a girl. The person is very uncomfortable with the gender they were born as. Causes 
 
 Gender dysphoria used to be known as gender identity disorder.  People with gender dysphoria may act as members of the opposite sex. Gender dysphoria may affecta person's: Choice of sexual partners Mannerisms, behavior, and dress Self-concept Gender dysphoria is not the same as homosexuality.  Identity conflicts need to continue over time to be considered gender dysphoria. How the gender conflict occurs is different in each person. For example, some people may cross-dress while others want sex-change surgery. Some people of one gender privately identify more with the other gender. People who are born with  ambiguous genitalia , which can raise questions about their gender, may develop gender dysphoria. The cause of gender dysphoria is unknown. Hormones in the womb, genes, social and environmental factors (such as parenting) may be involved.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can vary by age and are affected by the person's social environment.  Children may: Be disgusted by their own genitals Be rejected by their peers, feel alone Believe that they will grow up to become the opposite sex Say that they want to be the opposite sex Adults may: Dress like the opposite sex Feel alone Want to live as a person of the opposite sex Wish to be rid of their own genitals Adults and children may: Cross-dress, show habits typical of the opposite sex Have  depression  or  anxiety Withdraw from social interaction Exams and Tests 
 
 The feeling of being in the body of the "wrong" gender must last for at least 2 years for this diagnosis to be made. A history and psychiatric evaluation can confirm the person's constant desire to be the opposite sex. Treatment 
 
 Individual and family therapy is recommended for children to create a supportive environment at home and in school. Individual and, if appropriate, couples therapy is recommended for adults.  Sex reassignment through surgery and hormonal therapy is an option. But identity problems may continue after this treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Diagnosing and treating gender dysphoria early can reduce the chance of depression, emotional distress, and suicide. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms of gender dysphoria.  Alternative Names 
 
 Transsexualism; Transgender Images 
 
 
 Male and female reproductive systems 
 References 
 
 Adelson SL; American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Committee on Quality Issues. Practice parameter on gay, lesbian, or bisexual sexual orientation, gender nonconformity, and gender discordance in children and adolescents.  J Am Acad Child Adolesc . 2012;51:957-974. PMID: 22917211  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22917211 . American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Shafer LC. Sexual disorders and sexual dysfunction. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 36. White PC. Disorders of sexual development. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 233. 
 Review Date 2/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Timothy Rogge, MD, Medical Director, Family Medical Psychiatry Center, Kirkland, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 08/15/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia