
 General anesthesia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 General anesthesia is treatment with certain medicines that puts you into a deep sleep so you do not feel pain during surgery. After you receive these medicines, you will not be aware of what is happening around you. Description 
 
 Most times, a doctor called an anesthesiologist will give you the anesthesia. Sometimes, a certified and registered nurse anesthetist will take care of you. The medicine is given into your vein. You may be asked to breathe in (inhale) a special gas through a mask. Once you are asleep, the doctor may insert a tube into your windpipe (trachea) to help you breathe and protect your lungs. You will be watched very closely while you are asleep. Your blood pressure, pulse, and breathing will be monitored. The health care provider taking care of you can change how deeply asleep you are during the surgery. You will not move, feel any pain, or have any memory of the procedure because of this medicine. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 General anesthesia is a safe way to stay asleep and pain-free during procedures that would: Be too painful Take a long time Affect your ability to breathe Make you uncomfortable Cause too much anxiety  You may also be able to have  conscious sedation  for your procedure. Sometimes, though, it is not enough to make you comfortable. Children may need general anesthesia for a medical or dental procedure to handle any pain or anxiety they may feel. Risks 
 
 General anesthesia is usually safe for healthy people. You may have a higher risk of problems with general anesthesia if you: Abuse alcohol or medicines Have allergies or a family history of being allergic to medicines Have heart, lung, or kidney problems Smoke  Ask your doctor about these complications: Death (rare) Harm to your vocal cords Heart attack Lung infection Mental confusion (temporary) Stroke Trauma to the teeth or tongue Waking during anesthesia (rare)  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your health care provider: If you could be pregnant What medicines you are taking, even drugs or herbs you bought without a prescription  During the days before the surgery: An anesthesiologist will take a complete medical history to determine the type and amount of the anesthesia you need. This includes asking you about any allergies, health conditions, medicines, and history of anesthesia. Several days to a week before surgery, you may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), and warfarin (Coumadin). Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Always try to stop smoking. Your doctor can help.  On the day of your surgery: You will likely be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before the surgery. This is to prevent you from vomiting while you are under the effect of the anesthesia. Vomiting can cause food in the stomach to be inhaled into the lungs. This can lead to breathing problems. Take the drugs that your provider told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will wake up tired and groggy in the recovery or operating room. You may also feel sick to your stomach, and have a dry mouth, sore throat, or feel cold or restless until the effect of the anesthesia wears off. Your nurse will monitor these side effects, which will wear off, but it may take a few hours. Sometimes, nausea and vomiting can be treated with other medicines. Follow your surgeon's instructions while you recover and care for your surgical wound. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 General anesthesia is generally safe because of modern equipment, medicines, and safety standards. Most people recover completely and do not have any complications. References 
 
 Cohen NH. Perioperative management. In: Miller RD, ed.  Miller's Anesthesia . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 3. Sherwood ER, Williams CG, Prough DS. Anesthesiology principles, pain management, and conscious sedation. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Conscious sedation for surgical procedures 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Anesthesia - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Anesthesia - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 3/8/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dale Mueller, MD, cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, HeartCare Midwest; Chairman, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Surgery, OSF St. Francis Medical Center; and Clinical Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Illinois, Peoria, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anesthesia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia