
 Genital injury 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A genital injury is an injury to male or female sex organs, especially those outside the body. It also refers to injury in the area between the legs, called the perineum. Considerations 
 
 Injury to the genitals can be very painful. It may cause a lot of bleeding. Such injury can affect the reproductive organs and the bladder and urethra. Damage may be temporary or permanent. Causes 
 
 Genital injury can occur in both women and young girls. It may be caused by placing items into the vagina. Young girls (usually less than 4 years of age) may do this during normal exploration of the body. Objects used may include toilet tissue, crayons, beads, pins, or buttons. It is important to rule out sexual abuse, rape, and assault. The health care provider should ask the girl how the object was placed there. In men and young boys, common causes of genital injury include: Having the toilet seat fall down onto the area Getting the area caught in a pant zipper Straddle injury - falling and landing with the legs on each side of a bar, such as a monkey bar or the middle of a bicycle  Symptoms 
 
 Abdominal pain Bleeding Bruising Change in shape of the affected area Faintness Foul-smelling  vaginal discharge Object embedded in a body opening Groin pain  or genital pain (can be extreme) Swelling Urine drainage Vomiting Urination that is painful  or the inability to urinate Wound  First Aid 
 
 Keep the person calm. Be sensitive to privacy. Cover the injured area while giving first aid. Control bleeding by using direct pressure. Place a clean cloth or sterile dressing on any open wounds. If the vagina is bleeding severely, put sterile gauze or clean cloths on the area, unless a foreign body is suspected. Apply cold compresses to help reduce swelling. If the  testicles  have been injured, support them with a sling made from towels. Place them on a padded cloth such as a diaper. If there is an object stuck in a body opening or wound, leave it alone and seek medical attention. Taking it out may cause more damage. DO NOT 
 
 Do not try to remove an object by yourself. Seek medical help immediately. Never volunteer your thoughts on how you think the injury happened. If you think the injury was the result of assault or abuse, do NOT let the person change clothes or take a bath or shower. See immediate medical help. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 A straddle injury is damage to the testicle or urinary tract. Immediately get medical help if there is: A lot of swelling or bruising Blood in the urine  Seek immediate medical help if there is a genital injury and: Pain, bleeding, or swelling A concern about sexual abuse Problems urinating Blood in the urine  Prevention 
 
 Teach safety to young children and create a safe environment for them. Also, keep small objects out of the reach of toddlers. Alternative Names 
 
 Scrotal trauma; Straddle injury; Toilet seat injury Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Normal female anatomy 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: History, physical examination, and the urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 3. Read More 
 
 Rape (sexual assault) - overview 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healtcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Wounds and Injuries 
 Browse the Encyclopedia