
 Genital sores - female 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sores or lesions on the female genitalia or in the vagina may occur for many reasons.  Considerations 
 
 Genital sores may be painful or itchy, or may produce no symptoms. Other symptoms that may be present include pain when you urinate or painful sexual intercourse. Depending on the cause, a discharge from the vagina may be present. Causes 
 
 Infections spread through sexual contact can cause these sores: Herpes is a common cause of painful sores. Genital warts  may cause painless sores. Less common infections such as  chancroid ,  granuloma inguinale ,  molluscum contagiosum , and syphilis may also cause sores. Changes that may lead to cancer of the vulva (vulvar dysplasia) may appear as white, red, or brown patches on the vulva. These areas may itch. Skin cancers such as  melanoma  and basal cell and  squamous cell carcinomas  may also be found, but are less common. Other common causes of genital sores include: Long-term (chronic) skin disorder that involves scaly and itchy rashes. ( atopic dermatitis ) Skin that becomes red, sore, or inflamed after contact with perfumes, detergents, fabric softeners, feminine sprays, ointments, creams, douches. ( contact dermatitis ) Cysts or  abscesses of the Bartholin  or other glands Trauma or scratches Flu-type viruses that can cause genital sores or ulcers in some cases Home Care 
 
 See a health care provider before treating yourself. Self-treatment may make it harder for the provider to find the source of the problem.  A  sitz bath  may help relieve itching and crusting. If the sores are caused by a sexually transmitted infection, your sexual partner may need to be tested and treated as well. Do not have any type of sexual activity until your provider says the sores can no longer be spread to others. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you: Find any unexplained genital sore Have a change in a genital sore Have genital itching that does not go away with home care Think you might have a sexually transmitted infection Have pelvic pain, fever, vaginal bleeding, or other new symptoms as well genital sores What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical examination. The physical exam most often includes a pelvic examination. You will be asked about your symptoms and medical history. Questions may include: What does the sore look like? Where is it located? When did you first notice it? Do you have more than 1? Does it hurt or itch? Has it grown bigger? Have you ever had 1 before? How often do you have sexual activity? Do you have painful urination or pain during sexual intercourse? Do you have abnormal vaginal drainage?  The following tests may be done: Complete blood count  (CBC) Blood differential Skin or mucosal biopsy culture Treatment may include medicines that you put on the skin or take by mouth. The type of medicine depends on the cause. Alternative Names 
 
 Sores on the female genitals Images 
 
 
 Genital sores (female) 
 References 
 
 Augenbraun MH. Genital skin and mucous membrane lesions. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 108. Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Infections of the lower genital tract. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 23. Frumovitz M, Bodurka DC. Neoplastic diseases of the vulva. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 30. Link RE, Rosen T. Cutaneous diseases of the external genitalila. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Chancroid 
 Donovanosis (granuloma inguinale) 
 Genital herpes 
 Genital warts 
 Melanoma 
 Molluscum contagiosum 
 Vulvovaginitis - overview 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia