
 Giardia infection 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Giardia, or giardiasis, is an infection of the small intestine. A tiny parasite called  Giardia lamblia  causes it. Causes 
 
 The giardia parasite lives in soil, food, and water. It may also be found on surfaces that have come into contact with animal or human waste.  You may become infected if you:  Are exposed to a family member with giardiasis Drink water from lakes or streams where animals such as beavers and muskrats, or domestic animals such as sheep, have left their waste Eat raw or undercooked food that has been contaminated with the parasite Have direct person-to-person contact in daycare centers, long-term care homes, or nursing homes with people who are infected with the parasite Have unprotected anal sex Travelers are at risk for giardiasis throughout the world. Campers and hikers are at risk if they drink untreated water from streams and lakes.  Symptoms 
 
 The time between becoming infected and symptoms is 7 to 14 days.  Diarrhea is the main symptom. Other symptoms include: Abdominal gas or  bloating Headache Loss of appetite Low-grade  fever Nausea Weight loss and loss of body fluids Some people who have had a giardia infection for a long time continue having symptoms, even after the infection is gone.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include:  
 Stool antigen test to check for giardia 
  Stool ova and parasites exam String test  (rarely performed) Treatment 
 
 If there are no symptoms or only mild symptoms, no treatment may be needed. Some infections go away on their own within a few weeks.  Medicines may be used for: Severe symptoms or symptoms that do not go away People who work in a daycare center or nursing home, to reduce the spread of disease Antibiotic treatment is successful for most people. A change in the type of antibiotic will be tried if symptoms do not go away. Side effects from some of the medicines used to treat giardia are: Metallic taste in the mouth Nausea Severe reaction to alcohol In most pregnant women, treatment should not start until after delivery. Some drugs used to treat the infection can be harmful to the unborn baby. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Dehydration  (loss of water and other fluids in the body) Malabsorption  (inadequate absorption of nutrients from the intestinal tract) Weight loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Diarrhea or other symptoms last for more than 14 days You have  blood in your stool You are dehydrated Prevention 
 
 Purify all stream, pond, river, lake, or well water before drinking it. Use methods such as boiling, filtration, or iodine treatment.  Workers in daycare centers or institutions should use good handwashing and hygiene techniques when going from child to child or person to person. Safer sexual practices  may decrease the risk for getting or spreading giardiasis. People practicing anal sex should be especially careful. Peel or wash fresh fruits and vegetables before eating them. Alternative Names 
 
  
 Giardia; 
   G. duodenalis;  G. intestinalis;  Traveler's diarrhea - giardiasis  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Giardiasis 
 Institutional hygiene 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 DuPont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 283. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis and bacterial food poisoning. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Nash TE, Hill DR. Giardiasis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 351. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Dehydration 
 Malabsorption 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diarrhea - what to ask your doctor - child  
 Diarrhea - what to ask your health care provider  - adult 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Giardia Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia