
 Gilbert disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gilbert disease is a common disorder passed down through families. It affects the way bilirubin is processed by the liver, and causes the skin to take on a yellow color ( jaundice ). Causes 
 
 Gilbert disease affects 1 in 10 people in some white groups. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Fatigue Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (mild jaundice)  In people with Gilbert disease, jaundice most often appears during times of exertion, stress, and infection, or when they do not eat. Exams and Tests 
 
 A blood test for bilirubin shows changes that occur with Gilbert disease. The total bilirubin level is mildly elevated, with most being unconjugated bilirubin. Most often the total level is less than 2 mg/dL, and the conjugated bilirubin level is normal. Gilbert disease is linked to a genetic problem, but genetic testing is not needed. Treatment 
 
 No treatment is necessary for Gilbert disease. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Jaundice may come and go throughout life. It is more likely to appear during illnesses such as colds. It does not cause health problems. However, it can confuse the results of tests for jaundice. Possible Complications 
 
 There are no known complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have jaundice or pain in the abdomen that does not go away. Prevention 
 
 There is no proven prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Icterus intermittens juvenilis; Low-grade chronic hyperbilirubinemia; Familial non-hemolytic-non-obstructive jaundice; Constitutional liver dysfunction; Unconjugated benign bilirubinemia Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 References 
 
 Berk PD, Korenblat KM. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver test results In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 149. Lidofsky SD. Jaundice. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 20. Theise ND. Liver and gallbladder. In: Kumar V, Abbas AK, Fausto N, Aster JC, eds.  Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Bilirubin blood test 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, Gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Jaundice 
 Browse the Encyclopedia