
 Gingivostomatitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Gingivostomatitis is an infection of the mouth and gums that leads to swelling and sores. It may be due to a virus or bacteria. Causes 
 
 Gingivostomatitis is common among children. It may occur after infection with the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), which also causes  cold sores. The condition may also occur after infection with a  coxsackie virus . 
  It may occur in people with poor oral hygiene. Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms can be mild or severe and may include: Bad breath Fever General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling (malaise) Sores on the inside of the cheeks or gums Very sore mouth with no desire to eat Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will check your mouth for small ulcers. These sores are similar to mouth ulcers caused by other conditions. Cough, fever, or muscle aches may indicate other conditions. Most of the time, no special tests are needed to diagnose gingivostomatitis. However, the doctor may take a small piece of tissue from the sore to check for a viral or bacterial infection. This is called a culture. A  biopsy  may be done to rule out other types of mouth ulcers. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms. Things you can do at home include: Practice good  oral hygiene . Brush your gums well to reduce the risk of getting another infection. Use mouth rinses that reduce pain if your doctor recommends them. Rinse your mouth with salt water (one-half teaspoon or 3 grams of salt in 1 cup or 240 milliliters of water) or mouthwashes with hydrogen peroxide or Xylocaine to ease discomfort. Eat a healthy diet. Soft, bland (non-spicy) foods may reduce discomfort during eating.
  You may need to take antibiotics.  You may need to have the infected tissue removed by the dentist (called debridement). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Gingivostomatitis infections range from mild to severe and painful. The sores often get better in 2 or 3 weeks with or without treatment. Treatment may reduce discomfort and speed healing. Possible Complications 
 
 Gingivostomatitis may disguise other, more serious mouth ulcers. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have mouth sores and fever or other signs of illness
   Mouth sores get worse or do not respond to treatment within 3 weeks
   Images 
 
 
 Gingivitis 
 Gingivitis 
 References 
 
 Christian JM, Goddard AC, Gillespie MB. Deep neck and odontotogenic infections. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 10. Romero JR, Modlin. Coxsackieviruses, echovirsuses, and numbered enteroviruses. JF In: Bennett JE, ed.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 174. Schiffer JT, Corey L. Herpes simplex virus. In: Bennett JE, ed.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 138. Read More 
 
 Herpangina 
 Herpetic stomatitis 
 Mouth ulcers 
 Mucosa 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, otolaryngology-head and neck surgery, airway, voice, and swallowing disorders, clinical instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gum Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia