
 Glossitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Glossitis is a problem in which the tongue is swollen and changes color, often making the surface of the tongue appear smooth.  Geographic tongue  is a type of glossitis. Causes 
 
 Glossitis is often a symptom of other conditions, such as: Allergic reactions to oralcare products, foods, or medicine Dry mouth due to  Sjogren syndrome Infection from bacteria, yeast or viruses (including oral herpes) Injury (such as from burns, rough teeth, or bad-fitting dentures) Skin conditions that affect the mouth Irritants such as tobacco, alcohol, hot foods, spices, or other irritants Hormonal factors Certain vitamin deficiencies  At times, glossitis may be passed down in families. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of glossitis may come on quickly or develop over time. They include:  Problems chewing, swallowing, or speaking Smooth surface of the tongue Sore, tender, or swollen tongue Pale or bright red color to the tongue Tongue swelling  Rare symptoms or problems include Blocked airway Problems speaking, chewing, or swallowing  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your dentist or health care provider will do an exam to look for: Finger-like bumps on the surface of the tongue (called papillae) that may be missing Swollen tongue (or patches of swelling)  The provider may ask questions about your health history and lifestyle to help discover the cause of tongue inflammation. You may need blood tests to rule out other medical problems. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce swelling and soreness. Most people do not need to go to the hospital unless the tongue is very swollen. Treatment may include: Good oral care. Brush your teeth thoroughly at least twice a day and floss at least once a day. Antibiotics or other medicines to treat infection. Diet changes and supplements to treat nutrition problems. Avoiding irritants (such as hot or spicy foods, alcohol, and tobacco) to ease discomfort.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Glossitis goes away with if the cause of problem is removed or treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: 
Symptoms of glossitis last longer than 10 days.
   
Tongue swelling is very bad.
   
Breathing, speaking, chewing, or swallowing causes problems.
   Get emergency care right away if tongue swelling blocks the airway. Prevention 
 
 Good oral care (thorough tooth brushing and flossing and regular dental checkups) may help prevent glossitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Tongue inflammation; Tongue infection; Smooth tongue; Glossodynia; Burning tongue syndrome Images 
 
 
 Tongue 
 References 
 
 Mirowski GW, Mark LA. Oral disease and oral-cutaneous manifestations of gastrointestinal and liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 22. Reamy BV, Derby R, Bunt CW. Common tongue conditions in primary care.  Am Fam Physician . 2010;81(5):627-34. PMID: 20187599  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20187599 .  Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Canker sore 
 Chronic 
 Erythema multiforme 
 Geographic tongue 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 Lichen planus 
 Pemphigus vulgaris 
 Pernicious anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, otolaryngology-head and neck surgery, airway, voice, and swallowing disorders, clinical instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tongue Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia