
 Gram stain of skin lesion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A gram stain of a skin lesion is a laboratory test that uses special stains to detect and identify bacteria in a sample from a skin sore. The gram stain method is one of the most commonly used techniques to quickly diagnose bacterial infections. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Your health care provider will remove a sample of tissue from the skin sore. For information on how this is done, see the article on  skin lesion biopsy . The sample is sent to a laboratory, where it is applied in a very thin layer to a glass slide. A series of different colored stains is applied to the sample. A laboratory team member examines the stained slide under a microscope, checking for bacteria. The color, size, and shape of the cells help identify the germ causing the infection. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No preparation is needed for the laboratory test. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 The laboratory test is painless. For information on what it feels like to have the skin sample removed, see:  Skin lesion biopsy . Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have signs of an infected skin sore. The test is done to determine which bacteria caused the infection. Normal Results 
 
 The test is normal if no bacteria are found. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means bacteria have been found in the skin lesion. Further tests are needed to confirm the results. Risks 
 
 There are no risks related to the laboratory test. For information on risks related to removing a skin sample, see:  Skin lesion biopsy . Considerations 
 
 A  skin or mucosal culture  may be done along with this test. Other studies are often done on a skin sample to determine if cancer is present. Viral skin lesions like herpes simplex are examined by other tests or a viral culture. Alternative Names 
 
 Skin lesion gram stain Images 
 
 
 Viral lesion culture 
 References 
 
 Hall GS, Woods GL. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 57. 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Richard J. Moskowitz, MD, dermatologist in private practice, Mineola, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia