
 Grass allergy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Many people are  allergic to pollens from grass and weeds . These  allergies  most often occur in the late spring and summer. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Although the grass itself may not be harmful, fertilizers,  insecticides , and herbicides applied to the grass can be poisonous. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Breathing difficulty Headache Itchy, watery eyes Runny nose Sneezing Stuffy nose  Home Care 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have trouble breathing. If breathing becomes extremely difficult, seek immediate medical help. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Type of symptoms the person is having  If the grass was recently treated with a chemical of any sort such as fertilizer, insecticide, or herbicide, find out the product name and ingredients. Poison Control 
 
 This call is most often not needed unless the person is having a severe allergic reaction to the grass or is having trouble breathing. If the grass has recently been fertilized, sprayed with an insecticide or herbicide, or treated with a chemical in any way, contact poison control. Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 An emergency room visit is not necessary most of the time, unless the person has an asthma attack or severe allergic reaction. If an emergency room visit is needed, the person may receive: Breathing support Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Normally there are no major problems unless the person has  asthma  or a severe allergic reaction to the grass. Recovery is likely.  References 
 
 Cannon RD, Ruha A-M. Insecticides, herbicides, and rodenticides. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 146. Corren J, Baroody FMl, Pawanker R. Allergic and nonallergic rhinitis. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 42. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia