
 Grief 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Grief is a reaction to a major loss of someone or something. It is most often an unhappy and painful emotion. Causes 
 
 Grief may be triggered by the death of a loved one. People also can experience grief if they have an illness for which there is no cure, or a chronic condition that affects their quality of life. The end of a significant relationship may also cause grieving. Everyone feels grief in their own way. But there are common stages to the process of mourning. It starts with recognizing a loss and continues until a person eventually accepts that loss.  People's responses to grief will be different, depending on the circumstances of the death. For example, if the person who died had a  chronic  illness, the death may have been expected. The end of the person's suffering might even have come as a relief. If the death was accidental or violent, coming to a stage of acceptance might take longer. Symptoms 
 
 One way to describe grief is in five stages. These reactions might not occur in a specific order, and can occur together. Not everyone experiences all of these emotions: Denial, disbelief, numbness Anger, blaming others Bargaining (for instance, "If I am cured of this cancer, I will never smoke again.") Depressed mood, sadness, and crying Acceptance, coming to terms People who are grieving may have crying spells, trouble sleeping, and lack of productivity at work. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, including your sleep and appetite. Symptoms that last for a while may lead to clinical  depression . Treatment 
 
 Family and friends can offer emotional support during the grieving process. Sometimes outside factors can affect the normal grieving process, and people might need help from: Clergy Mental health specialists Social workers Support groups The acute phase of grief often lasts up to 2 months. Milder symptoms may last for a year or longer. Psychological counseling may help a person who is unable to face the loss (absent grief reaction), or who has depression with grieving. Support Groups 
 
 Joining a support group where members share common experiences and problems and help relieve the  stress  from grieving especially if you have  lost a child  or  spouse . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 It may take a year or longer to overcome strong feelings of grief and to accept the loss. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result from ongoing grief include: Drug or alcohol use Depression When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You can't deal with grief You are using excessive amounts of drugs or alcohol You become very depressed You have long-term depression that interferes with your daily life  Prevention 
 
 Grief should not be prevented because it is a healthy response to loss. Instead, it should be respected. Those who are grieving should have support to help them through the process. Alternative Names 
 
 Mourning; Grieving; Bereavement References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Powell AD. Grief, bereavement, and adjustment disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Major depression 
 
 Review Date 2/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Timothy Rogge, MD, Medical Director, Family Medical Psychiatry Center, Kirkland, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bereavement 
 Browse the Encyclopedia