
 Hair transplant 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hair transplant is a surgical procedure to improve baldness. Description 
 
 During a hair transplant, hairs are moved from an area of thick growth to bald areas. Most hair transplants are done in a doctor's office. The procedure is performed as follows: You receive local anesthesia to numb the scalp. You may also receive medicine to relax you. Your scalp is thoroughly cleaned. A strip of your hairy scalp is removed using a scalpel (surgical knife) and set aside. This area of your scalp is called the donor area. The scalp is closed using tiny stitches. Small groups of hairs, or individual hairs, are carefully separated out from the removed scalp. The bald areas that will receive these healthy hairs are cleaned. These areas of your scalp are called the recipient areas. Tiny cuts are made in the bald area. Healthy hairs are carefully placed in the cuts. During a single treatment session, hundreds or even thousands of hairs may be transplanted.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 A hair transplant can improve the appearance and self-confidence in people who are balding. This procedure cannot create new hair. It can only move the hair you already have to the areas that are bald. Most people who have a hair transplant have  male  or  female pattern baldness . Hair loss is on the front or top of the scalp. You must still have thick hair on the back or sides of the scalp to have enough hair follicles to move. In some cases, people with hair loss from  lupus , injuries, or other medical problems are treated with a hair transplant. Risks 
 
 Risks of surgery in general include: Bleeding Infection  Other risks that can occur with this procedure: Scarring Unnatural-looking tufts of new hair growth  It is possible that the transplanted hair will not look as good as you had desired. If you plan to have a hair transplant, you should be in good health. This is because surgery is less likely to be safe and successful if your health is poor. Discuss your risks and options with your doctor before undergoing this procedure. After the Procedure 
 
 Follow the doctor's instructions about caring for your scalp and any other self-care measures. This is especially important to ensure healing. For a day or two after the procedure, you may have a large surgical dressing or a smaller dressing that can be protected by a baseball cap. During the recovery period after surgery, your scalp may be very tender. You may need to take pain medicines. You may also need to take antibiotics or anti-inflammatory medicines after surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most hair transplants result in excellent hair growth within several months after the procedure. More than one treatment session may be needed to create best results. The replaced hairs are usually permanent. No long-term care is necessary. Alternative Names 
 
 Hair restoration Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Avram MR, Keene SA, Stough DB, Rogers NE. Hair restoration. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 157. Fisher J. Hair restoration. In: Neligan PC, ed.  Plastic Surgery . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 23. 
 Review Date 2/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Hebe Molmenti, MD, PhD, private practice specializing in plastic and reconstructive surgery, Baltimore, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hair Loss 
 Browse the Encyclopedia