
 HCG in urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This type of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) test measures the specific level of HCG in the urine. HCG is a hormone produced in the body during pregnancy. Other HCG tests include: HCG in blood serum - qualitative HCG in blood serum - quantitative Pregnancy test How the Test is Performed 
 
 To collect a urine sample, you urinate into a special (sterile) cup. Home pregnancy tests require the test strip to be dipped into the urine sample or passed through the urine stream while urinating. Carefully follow package directions. Usually a urine sample taken the first time you urinate in the morning is best. This is when urine is the most concentrated and has enough HCG to be detected. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves urinating into a cup or onto a test strip. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Urine HCG tests are a common method of determining if a woman is pregnant. The best time to test for pregnancy at home is after you miss your period. Normal Results 
 
 The test is negative if you are not pregnant. The test is positive if you are pregnant.  A pregnancy test, including a properly performed home pregnancy test, is considered to be very accurate. Positive results are more likely to be accurate than negative results. When the test is negative but pregnancy is still suspected, the test should be repeated in 1 week. Risks 
 
 There are no risks, except for false positive or false negative results. Alternative Names 
 
 Beta-HCG - urine; Human chorionic gonadotropin - urine Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Morrison LJ. General approach to the pregnant patient. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2009:chap 175. Warner EA, Herold AH. Interpreting laboratory tests. In: Rakel RE, ed.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 15. Webster RA. Reproductive function and pregnancy. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.  22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Choriocarcinoma 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 Miscarriage 
 Pregnancy test 
 Testicular cancer 
 
 Review Date 11/16/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hormones 
 Pregnancy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia