
 HCG blood test - qualitative 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A qualitative HCG blood test checks if there is a hormone called  human chorionic gonadotropin  in your blood. HCG is a hormone produced in the body during pregnancy. Other HCG tests include: HCG urine test Quantitative pregnancy test  (checks specific level of HCG in your blood)  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. This is usually taken from a vein. The procedure is called a  venipuncture . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is necessary. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Most often, this test is performed to determine if you are pregnant. HCG level in the blood may also be high in women with certain types of ovarian tumors or in men with testicular tumors. Normal Results 
 
 The test is negative if you are not pregnant.
 The test is positive if you are pregnant. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If your blood HCG is positive and you do not have a pregnancy properly implanted in the uterus, it may indicate: Ectopic pregnancy Miscarriage Testicular cancer  (in men) Trophoblastic tumor Hydatidiform mole Ovarian cancer Risks 
 
 There is very little risk in having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks of having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Blood accumulating under the skin (hematoma) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Considerations 
 
 False positive tests may occur when certain hormones are increased, such as after  menopause  or when taking hormone supplements. A pregnancy test is considered to be very accurate. When the test is negative but pregnancy is still suspected, the test should be repeated in 1 week. Alternative Names 
 
 Beta-HCG in blood serum - qualitative; Human chorionic gonadotrophin - serum - qualitative; Pregnancy test - blood - qualitative; Serum HCG - qualitative; HCG in blood serum - qualitative Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Lee P, Pincus MR, McPherson RA. Diagnosis and management of cancer using serologic tumor markers. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds. Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 74. Webster RA. Reproductive function and pregnancy. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Choriocarcinoma 
 Ectopic pregnancy 
 HCG in urine 
 Hydatidiform mole 
 Miscarriage 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Ovarian cysts 
 Testicular cancer 
 
 Review Date 11/16/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hormones 
 Pregnancy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia