
 Head CT scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A head  computed tomography  (CT) scan uses many x-rays to create pictures of the head, including the skull, brain, eye sockets, and sinuses. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Head CT is done in the hospital or radiology center. You lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the CT scanner. While inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you.  A computer creates separate images of the body area, called slices. These images can be:  Stored Viewed on a monitor Printed on film  Three-dimensional models of the head area can be created by stacking the slices together. You must be still during the exam, because movement causes blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short periods. A complete scan usually take only 30 seconds to a few minutes.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Certain CT exams require a special dye, called contrast material. It is delivered into the body before the test starts. Contrast helps certain areas show up better on x-rays. Contrast can be given through a vein (IV) in your hand or forearm. If contrast is used, you may also be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test. Let your health care provider know if you have ever had a reaction to contrast. You may need to take medicines before the test in order to safely receive it. Before receiving the contrast, tell your provider if you take the diabetes medicine metformin (Glucophage). You may need to take extra precautions. Also let your provider know if you have any kidney function problems as the IV contrast can worsen this problem.  If you weigh more than 300 pounds (135 kg), find out if the CT machine has a weight limit. Some machines do.  You will be asked to remove jewelry and may need to wear a hospital gown during the study. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-rays produced by the CT scan are painless. Some people may have discomfort from lying on the hard table. Contrast material given through a vein may cause a:  Slight burning feeling Metallic taste in the mouth Warm flushing of the body  This is normal and usually goes away within a few seconds. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A head CT scan is recommended to help diagnose or monitor the following conditions: Birth (congenital) defect of the head or brain Brain infection Brain tumor Buildup of fluid inside the skull ( hydrocephalus ) Injury (trauma) to the brain, head, or face Stroke  or bleeding in the brain  It may also be done to look for the cause of: Abnormal head size in children Changes in thinking or behavior Fainting Headache, when you have certain other signs or symptoms Hearing loss (in some people) Symptoms of damage to part of the brain, such as vision problems, muscle weakness, numbness and tingling, hearing loss, speaking difficulties, or swallowing problems  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Abnormal blood vessels ( arteriovenous malformation ) Bulging blood vessel in the brain  (aneurysm) Bleeding (for example,  subdural hematoma  or bleeding in the brain tissue) Bone infection Brain abscess  or infection Brain damage due to injury Brain tissue swelling or injury Brain tumor or other growth (mass) Loss of brain tissue  (cerebral atrophy) Fluid collecting inside the skull ( hydrocephalus ) Problems with the hearing nerve Stroke or  transient ischemic attack  (TIA)  Risks 
 
 Risks of CT scans include: Being exposed to radiation Allergic reaction to contrast dye Kidney damage from the contrast dye  CT scans use more radiation than regular x-rays. Having many x-rays or CT scans over time may increase your risk for cancer. However, the risk from any one scan is small. You and your provider should weigh this risk against the benefits of getting a correct diagnosis for a medical problem.  Some people have allergies to contrast dye. Let your provider know if you have ever had an allergic reaction to injected contrast dye. The most common type of contrast given into a vein contains iodine. If a person with an iodine allergy is given this type of contrast,  nausea or vomiting ,  sneezing ,  itching , or  hives  may occur. If you absolutely must be given such contrast, your provider may give you antihistamines (such as Benadryl) or steroids before the test to prevent an allergic reaction. The kidneys help remove iodine from the body. Those with kidney disease or diabetes may need to receive extra fluids after the test to help flush the iodine out of the body.  In rare cases, the dye may cause a life-threatening allergic response called  anaphylaxis . If you have any trouble breathing during the test, tell the scanner operator right away. Scanners come with an intercom and speakers, so someone can hear you at all times. Considerations 
 
 A CT scan can reduce or avoid the need for invasive procedures to diagnose problems in the skull. This is one of the safest ways to study the head and neck. Other tests that may be done instead of a head CT scan include: MRI of the head Positron emission tomography (PET) scan of the head Alternative Names 
 
 Brain CT; Cranial CT; CT scan - skull; CT scan - head; CT scan - orbits; CT scan - sinuses; Computed tomography - cranial; CAT scan - brain Images 
 
 
 Head CT 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. C. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:266-432. Shaw AS, Prokop M. Computed tomography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Absence seizure 
 Acoustic neuroma 
 Acoustic trauma 
 Acromegaly 
 Acute 
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
 Aneurysm in the brain 
 Benign positional vertigo 
 Brain abscess 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Central pontine myelinolysis 
 Chronic subdural hematoma 
 CT scan 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Delirium 
 Drug-induced tremor 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Encephalitis 
 Epidural hematoma 
 Epilepsy - overview 
 Essential tremor 
 Generalized tonic-clonic seizure 
 General paresis 
 Headache 
 Hearing loss 
 Huntington disease 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Hypopituitarism 
 Juvenile angiofibroma 
 Labyrinthitis 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Ludwig’s angina 
 Mastoiditis 
 Melanoma of the eye 
 Ménière disease 
 Meningitis 
 Metastatic brain tumor 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I 
 Neurosyphilis 
 Occupational hearing loss 
 Optic glioma 
 Orbital cellulitis 
 Otosclerosis 
 Partial (focal) seizure 
 Pick disease 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Primary lymphoma of the brain 
 Prolactinoma 
 Retinoblastoma 
 Reye syndrome 
 Schizophrenia 
 Stroke 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 Subdural hematoma  
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis 
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Vascular dementia 
 Wilson disease 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Acoustic Neuroma 
 Brain Diseases 
 Brain Malformations 
 Brain Tumors 
 Concussion 
 CT Scans 
 Encephalitis 
 Epilepsy 
 Head and Neck Cancer 
 Head Injuries 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia