
 Heart and vascular services 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The body's cardiovascular, or circulatory system, is made of the heart, blood, and blood vessels (arteries and veins). Heart and vascular services refers to the branch of medicine that focuses on the cardiovascular system. Watch this video about: Heartbeat Information 
 
 The heart's main job is to pump oxygen-rich blood to the body after it pumps oxygen-poor blood to the lungs. It normally does this 60 to 100 times a minute, 24 hours a day. The heart is made of four chambers: The right atrium receives oxygen-poor blood from the body. That blood then flows into the right ventricle, which pumps it to the lungs. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. From there, the blood flows into the left ventricle, which pumps blood out of the heart to the rest of the body.  Together, the arteries and veins are referred to as the vascular system. In general, arteries carry blood away from the heart and veins carry blood back to the heart. The cardiovascular system delivers oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and other important substances to cells and organs in the body. It plays an important role in helping the body meet the demands of activity, exercise, and stress. It also helps maintain body temperature, among other things. CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE Cardiovascular medicine refers to the branch of health care that specializes in the treatment of diseases or conditions dealing with the heart and vascular systems. Common disorders include: Abdominal aortic aneurysm Congenital heart defects Coronary artery disease , including angina and heart attack Heart failure Heart valve problems High blood pressure and high cholesterol Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias) Peripheral artery disease  (PAD) Stroke  Physicians involved in the treatment of circulatory or vascular diseases include: Cardiologists: Doctors who have received extra training in the treatment of heart disorders Vascular surgeons: Doctors who have received extra training in blood vessel surgery Cardiac and thoracic surgeons: Doctors who have received extra training in heart-related surgery and pacemaker implantation Primary care doctors  Other health care providers who are involved in the treatment of circulatory or vascular diseases include: Nurse practitioners (NPs) or physician assistants (PAs), who focus on heart and vascular diseases Nutritionists or dietitians Nurses who receive special training in the management of patients with these disorders  Imaging tests that may be done to diagnose, monitor or treat diseases of the circulatory and vascular system include: Cardiac CT  for calcium scoring Cardiac MRI Coronary angiography CT angiography (CTA) and  magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA) Echocardiogram PET scan of the heart Stress tests (many different types of stress tests exist) Vascular ultrasound, such as  carotid ultrasound Venous ultrasound of the arms and legs  SURGERIES AND INTERVENTIONS Less invasive procedures may be done to diagnose, monitor or treat diseases of the heart and vascular system. In most of these types of procedures, a catheter is inserted through the skin into a large blood vessel. In most cases, such procedures do not need  general anesthesia . Patients often do not need to stay in the hospital overnight. They recover in 1 to 3 days and can most often return to their normal activities within a week. Such procedures include: Ablation therapy to treat cardiac arrhythmias Angiogram  (using x-rays and injected contrast dye to evaluate blood vessels) Angioplasty (using a small balloon to open a narrowing in a blood vessel) with or without stent placement Cardiac catheterization (measuring pressures in and around the heart)  Heart surgery may be needed to treat certain heart or blood vessel problems. This may include: Heart transplant Insertion of pacemakers or defibrillators Open and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass surgery Repair or replacement of heart valves Surgical treatment of congenital heart defects  Vascular surgery refers to surgical procedures that are used to treat or diagnose problems in a blood vessel, such as a blockage or rupture. Such procedures include: Arterial bypass grafts Endarterectomies Repair of aneurysms (dilated/enlarged portions) of the aorta and its branches  Procedures may also be used to treat arteries that supply the brain, kidneys, intestines, arms and legs. CARDIOVASCULAR PREVENTION AND REHABILITATION Cardiac rehabilitation is therapy used to prevent heart disease from getting worse. It is usually recommended after major heart-related events such as a heart attack or cardiac surgery. It may include: Cardiovascular risk assessments Health screenings and wellness exams Nutrition and lifestyle counseling, including smoking cessation and diabetes education Supervised exercise  Alternative Names 
 
 Circulatory system; Vascular system; Cardiovascular system References 
 
 Boateng S, Sanborn T. The cardiovascular system. In: Bope ET, ed.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 7. Grubb N, Spratt J, Bradbury A. The cardiovascular system. In: Douglas G, Robertson C, eds.  Macleod's Clinical Examination . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 6. 
 Review Date 10/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Diseases 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia