
 Heart pacemaker 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pacemaker is a small, battery-operated device. This device senses when your heart is beating  irregularly or too slowly . It sends a signal to your heart that makes your heart beat at the correct pace. Description 
 
 Newer pacemakers weigh as little as 1 ounce (28 grams). Most pacemakers have 2 parts: The generator contains the battery and the information to control the heartbeat. The leads are wires that connect the heart to the generator and carry the electrical messages to the heart. A pacemaker must be implanted under the skin. This procedure takes about 1 hour in most cases. You will be given a sedative to help you relax. You will be awake during the procedure. A small incision (cut) is made. Most often, the cut is on the left side of the chest below your collarbone. The pacemaker generator is then placed under the skin at this location. The generator may also be placed in the abdomen, but this is less common. Using live x-rays to see the area, the doctor puts the leads through the cut, into a vein, and then into the heart. The leads are connected to the generator. The skin is closed with stitches. Most people go home within 1 day of the procedure. There are 2 kinds of pacemakers used only in medical emergencies. They are: Transcutaneous pacemakers Transvenous pacemakers  They are not permanent pacemakers. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Pacemakers may be used for people who have heart problems that cause their heart to beat too slowly. A slow heartbeat is called  bradycardia . Two common problems that cause a slow heartbeat are  sinus node disease  and heart block. When your heart beats too slowly, your body and brain may not get enough oxygen. Symptoms may be Lightheadedness Tiredness Fainting spells Shortness of breath Some pacemakers can be used to stop a heart rate that is too fast ( tachycardia ) or that is irregular. Other types of pacemakers can be used in severe  heart failure . These are called biventricular pacemakers. They help coordinate the beating of the heart chambers. Most biventricular pacemakers implanted today can also work as  implantable cardioverter defibrillators  (ICD). ICD restore a normal heartbeat by delivering a larger shock when a potentially deadly fast heart rhythm occurs. Watch this video about: Heartbeat Risks 
 
 Possible complications of pacemaker surgery are: Abnormal heart rhythms Bleeding Punctured lung. This is rare. Infection Puncture of the heart, which can lead to bleeding around the heart. This is rare.  A pacemaker senses if the heartbeat is above a certain rate. When it is above that rate, the pacemaker will stop sending signals to the heart. The pacemaker can also sense when the heartbeat slows down too much. It will automatically turn back on and start pacing the heart again. Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider about all the drugs you are taking, even drugs or herbs you bought without a prescription. The day before your surgery: Shower and shampoo well. You may be asked to wash your whole body below your neck with a special soap. On the day of the surgery: You may be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before your procedure. This includes chewing gum and breath mints. Rinse your mouth with water if it feels dry, but be careful not to swallow. Take the drugs you have been told to take with a small sip of water. Your provider will tell you when to arrive at the hospital. After the Procedure 
 
 You will probably be able to go home after 1 day. You should be able to return to your normal activity level quickly. Ask your provider how much  you can use the arm  on the side of your body where the pacemaker was placed. You may be advised not to: Lift anything heavier than 10 to 15 pounds (4.5 to 6.75 kilograms) Push, pull, and twist your arm for 2 to 3 weeks. Raise your arm above your shoulder for several weeks. When you leave the hospital, you will be given a card to keep in your wallet. This card lists the details of your pacemaker and has contact information for emergencies. You should always carry this wallet card with you. You should try to remember the name of the pacemaker manufacturer if you can in case you lose your card. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pacemakers can help keep your heart rhythm and heart rate at a safe level for you. The pacemaker battery lasts about 6 to 15 years. Your provider will check the battery regularly and replace it when necessary. Alternative Names 
 
 Cardiac pacemaker implantation; Artificial pacemaker; Permanent pacemaker; Internal pacemaker; Cardiac resynchronization therapy; CRT; Biventricular pacemaker; Arrhythmia - pacemaker; Abnormal heart rhythm - pacemaker; Bradycardia - pacemaker; Heart block - pacemaker; Mobitz - pacemaker; Heart failure - pacemaker; HF - pacemaker; CHF- pacemaker Images 
 
 
 Pacemaker 
 References 
 
 Epstein AE, DiMarco JP, Ellenbogen KA, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update incorporated into the ACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 guidelines for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61(3):e6-e75. PMID: 23265327  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23265327 . Olgin JE, Zipes DP. Specific arrhythmias. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 37. Swerdlow CD, Wang PJ, Zipes DP. Pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Heart failure - overview 
 Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
 Sick sinus syndrome 
 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Angina - discharge 
 Angina - what to ask your doctor  
 Angina - when you have chest pain 
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Atrial fibrillation - discharge  
 Butter, margarine, and cooking oils 
 Cholesterol and lifestyle 
 Controlling your high blood pressure 
 Dietary fats explained 
 Fast food tips 
 Heart attack - discharge 
 Heart attack - what to ask your doctor 
 Heart disease - risk factors 
 Heart failure - discharge 
 How to read food labels 
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator - discharge 
 Low-salt diet  
 Mediterranean diet 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 8/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pacemakers and Implantable Defibrillators 
 Browse the Encyclopedia