
 Hemolytic anemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Anemia  is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. Normally, red blood cells last for about 120 days in the body. In hemolytic anemia, red blood cells in the blood are destroyed earlier than normal. Causes 
 
 The bone marrow is mostly responsible for making new red cells. Bone marrow is the soft tissue in the center of bones that helps form all blood cells. Hemolytic anemia occurs when the bone marrow isn't making enough red cells to replace the ones that are being destroyed. There are several possible causes of hemolytic anemia. Red blood cells may be destroyed due to: An  autoimmune problem  in which the immune system mistakenly sees your own red blood cells as foreign substances and destroys them Genetic defects within the red cells (such as  sickle cell anemia ,  thalassemia , and  G6PD deficiency ) Exposure to certain chemicals, drugs, and toxins Infections Blood clots in small blood vessels Transfusion of blood from a donor with a blood type that does not match yours Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms if the anemia is mild. If the problem develops slowly, the first symptoms may be: Feeling weak or tired more often than usual, or with exercise Headaches Problems concentrating or thinking If the anemia gets worse, symptoms may include: Lightheadedness when you stand up Pale skin Shortness of breath Sore tongue Enlarged spleen Exams and Tests 
 
 A test called a  complete blood count  (CBC) can help diagnose anemia and offer some hints to the type and cause of the problem. Important parts of the CBC include  red blood cell count  (RBC), hemoglobin, and  hematocrit  (HCT). These tests can identify the type of hemolytic anemia: Absolute  reticulocyte count Coombs test, direct  and indirect Donath-Landsteiner test Cold agglutinins Free  hemoglobin  in the serum or urine Hemosiderin in the urine Platelet count Protein electrophoresis - serum Pyruvate kinase Serum haptoglobin  levels Serum LDH Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the type and cause of the hemolytic anemia: In emergencies, a blood transfusion may be needed. For an overactive immune system, drugs that suppress the immune system may be used. When blood cells are being destroyed at a fast pace, the body may need extra folic acid and iron supplements to replace what is being lost. In rare cases, surgery is needed to take out the spleen. This is because the spleen acts as a filter that removes abnormal cells from the blood. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on the type and cause of hemolytic anemia. Severe anemia can make heart disease, lung disease, or  cerebrovascular disease  worse. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of hemolytic anemia. Alternative Names 
 
 Anemia - hemolytic Images 
 
 
 Red blood cells, sickle cell 
 Red blood cells, multiple sickle cells 
 Red blood cells, sickle cells 
 Red blood cells, sickle and Pappenheimer 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 Gallegher PG. Hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 161. Jager U, Lechner K. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 44. Price EA, Schrier SS. Extrinsic nonimmune hemolytic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Cardiovascular 
 Congenital spherocytic anemia 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Immune hemolytic anemia 
 Intrinsic factor 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia