
 Hemoglobin C disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemoglobin C disease is a blood disorder passed down through families. It leads to a type of  anemia , which occurs when red blood cells break down earlier than normal. Causes 
 
 Hemoglobin C is an abnormal type of hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen. It is a type of hemoglobinopathy. The disease is caused by a problem with a gene called beta globin. The disease most often occurs in African Americans. You are more likely to have hemoglobin C disease if someone in your family has had it. Symptoms 
 
 Most people do not have symptoms. In some cases,  jaundice  may occur. Some people may develop  gallstones  that need to be treated. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show an  enlarged spleen . Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count Hemoglobin electrophoresis Peripheral blood smear Blood hemoglobin Treatment 
 
 In most cases, no treatment is needed. Folic acid supplements may help your body produce normal red blood cells and improve the symptoms of the anemia. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with hemoglobin C disease can expect to lead a normal life. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include:  Anemia  Ggallbladder disease Enlargement of the spleen When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of hemoglobin C disease. Prevention 
 
 You may want to seek genetic counseling if you are at high risk for the condition and are considering having a baby. Alternative Names 
 
 Clinical hemoglobin C Images 
 
 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 DeBaun MR, Frei-Jones MJ, Vichinsky. Hemoglobinopathies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 462. Steinberg MH. Sickle cell disease and associated hemoglobinopathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 163. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Gallstones 
 Hemoglobinopathy 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia