
 Hemolysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemolysis is the breakdown of red blood cells. Information 
 
 Red blood cells normally live for 110 to 120 days. After that, they naturally break down and are most often removed from the circulation by the spleen. Some diseases and processes cause  red blood cells to break down too soon . This requires the bone marrow to make more red blood cells than normal. The balance between red blood cell breakdown and production determines how low the red blood cell count becomes.  Conditions that can cause hemolysis include: Immune reactions Infections Medicines Toxins  and poisons Treatments such as hemodialysis or the use of the heart-lung bypass machine  References 
 
 Gallagher PG. Hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 161. Gallagher PG. Red blood cell membrane disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 43. Michel M. Autoimmune and intravascular hemolytic anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 160. Price EA, Otis S, Schier S. Red blood cell enzymopathies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 42. Schrier S, Price EA. Extrinsic nonimmune hemolytic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Toxins 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia