
 Hemorrhoid surgery 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemorrhoids  are swollen veins around the anus. They may be inside the anus (internal hemorrhoids) or outside the anus (external hemorrhoids). Often hemorrhoids do not cause problems. But if hemorrhoids bleed a lot, cause pain, or become swollen, hard, and painful, surgery can remove them. Description 
 
 Hemorrhoid surgery can be done in your health care provider's office or in the hospital operating room. In most cases, you can go home the same day. The type of surgery you have depends on your symptoms and the location and size of the hemorrhoid.  Before the surgery, your doctor will numb the area so you can stay awake, but not feel anything. For some types of surgery, you may be given  general anesthesia . This means you will be given medicine in your vein that puts you to sleep and keeps you pain-free during surgery.  Hemorrhoid surgery may involve: Putting a small rubber band around a hemorrhoid to shrink it by blocking blood flow. Stapling a hemorrhoid to block blood flow, causing it to shrink. Using a knife (scalpel) to remove hemorrhoids. You may or may not have stitches. Injecting a chemical into the blood vessel of the hemorrhoid to shrink it. Using a laser to burn the hemorrhoid.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Often you can manage small hemorrhoids by: Eating a high fiber diet Drinking more water Avoiding  constipation  (taking a fiber supplement if needed) Not straining when you have a bowel movement  When these measures do not work and you are having bleeding and pain, your doctor may recommend hemorrhoid surgery.  Risks 
 
 Risks for this type of surgery include: Bleeding Infection Leaking a small amount of stool (long-term problems are rare) Problems passing urine because of the pain  Before the Procedure 
 
 Several days before surgery, you may be asked to stop taking medicines that make it hard for your blood to clot. These medicines include: Aspirin Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) Naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn) Warfarin (Coumadin) Clopidogrel (Plavix)  Be sure to tell your provider: What medicines you are taking, including over-the-counter medicines, supplements, or herbal remedies. About any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illness you may have before your surgery.  On the day of your surgery: Follow your provider's instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take any medicines you are asked to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital. Be sure to arrive on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will usually go home the same day after your surgery. Be sure you arrange to have someone drive you home. You may have a lot of pain after surgery as the area tightens and relaxes. You may be given medicines to relieve pain.  Follow  instructions  on how to care for yourself at home. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people do very well after hemorrhoid surgery. You should recover fully in a few weeks, depending on how involved the surgery was. You will need to continue with diet and lifestyle changes to help prevent the hemorrhoids from coming back. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemorrhoidectomy Images 
 
 
 Hemorrhoid surgery  - series 
 References 
 
 Chaudhry V, Abcarian H. Hemorrhoids. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 53. Hall JF. Hemorrhoids and hemorrhoidectomy. In: Delaney CP, ed.  Netter's Surgical Anatomy and Approaches . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Fiber 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Varicose veins 
 
 Review Date 4/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemorrhoids 
 Browse the Encyclopedia