
 Hemoglobin derivatives 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemoglobin derivatives are altered forms of  hemoglobin . Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that moves oxygen and carbon dioxide between the lungs and body tissues. This article discusses the test used to detect and measure the amount of hemoglobin derivatives in your blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done using a small needle to collect a sample of blood from an artery. The sample may be collected from an artery in the wrist, groin, or arm. Before blood is drawn, the health care provider may test circulation to the hand (if the wrist is the site). After the blood is drawn, pressure applied to the puncture site for a few minutes stops the bleeding. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. For children, it may help to explain how the test will feel and why it is done. This may make the child feel less nervous. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to diagnose  carbon monoxide poisoning . It is also used to detect changes in hemoglobin that may result from certain drugs. Some chemicals or drugs can change the hemoglobin so it no longer works properly. Abnormal forms of hemoglobin include:  
 Carboxyhemoglobin: An abnormal form of hemoglobin that has attached to carbon monoxide instead of oxygen or carbon dioxide. High amounts of this type of abnormal hemoglobin prevent the normal movement of oxygen by the blood.  
 Sulfhemoglobin: A rare abnormal form of hemoglobin that can't carry oxygen. It may result from certain medicines such as phenacetin, or sulfonamides.  
 Methemoglobin: A problem that occurs when the iron that is part of hemoglobin is changed so that it does not carry oxygen well. Certain drugs and other compounds such as nitrites introduced into the blood stream can cause this problem. Normal Results 
 
 The following values represent the percentage of hemoglobin derivatives based on total hemoglobin: Carboxyhemoglobin: less than 1.5% (but may be as high as 9% in smokers) Methemoglobin: less than 2% Sulfhemoglobin: undetectable  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 High levels of hemoglobin derivatives can lead to major health problems. The altered forms of hemoglobin do not allow oxygen to be moved properly through the body. This can lead to tissue death. The following values, except sulfhemoglobin, represent the percentage of hemoglobin derivatives based on total hemoglobin: Carboxyhemoglobin: 10 to 20% - symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning begin to appear 30% - severe carbon monoxide poisoning present 50 to 80% - results in potentially deadly carbon monoxide poisoning  Methemoglobin: 10 to 25% - results in bluish skin color ( cyanosis ) 35 to 40% - results in shortness of breath and headache Over 60% - results in  lethargy  and  stupor Over 70% - may result in death  Sulfhemoglobin: Values of 10 grams per deciliter (g/dL) or 6.2 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) cause bluish skin color due to lack of oxygen (cyanosis), but do not cause harmful effects most of the time.  Alternative Names 
 
 Methemoglobin; Carboxyhemoglobin; Sulfhemoglobin Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Benz EJ Jr, Ebert BL. Hemoglobin variants associated with hemolytic anemia, altered oxygen affinity, and methemoglobinemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hoffman Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone ; 2013:chap 41. Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 158. Christiani DC. Physical and chemical injuries of the lung In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 94. Nelson LS, Ford MD. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning 
 Cytochrome b5 reductase 
 Fatigue 
 Hemoglobin 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Count Tests 
 Carbon Monoxide Poisoning 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia