
 Hemochromatosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemochromatosis is a condition in which there is too much iron in the body. It is also called iron overload.  Causes 
 
 Hemochromatosis may be a genetic disorder passed down through families. People with this type absorb too much iron through their digestive tract. Iron builds up in the body. The liver, heart, and pancreas are common organs where iron builds up. It is present at birth but may not be diagnosed for years. A person is more likely to get this disease if someone else in the family has or had the condition. Hemochromatosis may also occur as a result of: Other blood disorders, such as  thalassemia  or certain  anemias . Too many  blood transfusions  over time may lead to iron overload. Long-term alcohol use and other health conditions. This disorder affects more men than women. It is common in white people of western European descent. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Abdominal pain Fatigue, lack of energy, weakness Generalized darkening of skin color (often referred to as bronzing) Joint pain Loss of body hair Loss of sexual desire Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show liver and spleen swelling, and skin color changes. Blood tests may help make the diagnosis. Tests may include: Ferritin level Iron level Percentage of transferrin saturation (high) Genetic testing Other tests may include: 
   Blood sugar (glucose) level
    Alpha fetoprotein Echocardiogram  to examine the heart's function
    Electrocardiogram (ECG)  to look at the electrical activity of the heart
    
   Imaging tests such as CT scans, MRI, and ultrasound
    
   Liver function tests
    The condition may be confirmed with a  liver biopsy  or phlebotomy.  If a genetic defect is confirmed, other blood tests can be used to find out if other family members are at risk for iron overload. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to remove excess iron from the body and treat any organ damage. A procedure called phlebotomy is the best method for removing excess iron from the body: One half liter of blood is removed from the body each week until the body's iron level is normal. This may take many months to do. After that, the procedure may be done less often to maintain a normal iron level. Why the procedure is needed depends on your symptoms and levels of hemoglobin and serum ferritin, and how much iron you take in your diet. In men,  testosterone hormone therapy  can help improve the loss of sexual desire and changes in secondary sexual characteristics.  Other health problems such as diabetes, arthritis, liver failure, and heart failure will be treated. If you are diagnosed with hemochromatosis, you should follow a special diet to reduce how much iron is absorbed through your digestive tract. Your provider will recommend the following: Do not drink alcohol, especially if you have liver damage. Do not take iron pills or vitamins containing iron. Do not use iron cookware. Do not eat raw seafood (cooked is fine). Do not eat foods fortified with iron, such as 100% iron-fortified breakfast cereals. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Untreated, iron overload can lead to liver damage.  Extra iron may also build up in other areas of the body, including the thyroid gland, testicles, pancreas, pituitary gland, heart, or joints. Early treatment can help prevent complications such as liver disease, heart disease, arthritis or diabetes.  How well you do depends on the amount of organ damage. Some organ damage can be reversed when hemochromatosis is detected early and treated aggressively with phlebotomy. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: 
   Liver cirrhosis
    
   Liver failure
    Liver cancer The disease may lead to the development of: 
   Arthritis
    
   Diabetes
    
  Heart problems
    
   Increased risk for certain bacterial infections
    
   Testicular atrophy
    
  Skin color changes
    When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms of hemochromatosis develop.  Call for an appointment with your provider (for screening) if a family member has been diagnosed with hemochromatosis. Prevention 
 
 Screening family members of a person diagnosed with hemochromatosis may detect the disease early so that treatment can be started before organ damage has occurred in other affected relatives. Alternative Names 
 
 Iron overload; Blood transfusion - hemochromatosis Images 
 
 
 Hepatomegaly 
 References 
 
 Bacon BR, Britton RS. Hemochromatosis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 75. Ferri FF. Hemochromatosis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia: PA: Elsevier; 2016:585-586. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Diabetes 
 Hepatomegaly 
 Metabolism 
 Thalassemia 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemochromatosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia