
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Shiga-like toxin producing  E coli  hemolytic-uremic syndrome (STEC-HUS) is a disorder that most often occurs when an infection in the digestive system produces toxic substances. These substances destroy red blood cells and cause kidney injury. Causes 
 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) often occurs after a gastrointestinal infection with  E coli  bacteria ( Escherichia coli  O157:H7). However, the condition has also been linked to other gastrointestinal infections, including  shigella  and  salmonella . It has also been linked to nongastrointestinal infections. HUS is most common in children. It is the most common cause of acute kidney failure in children. Several large outbreaks have been linked to undercooked hamburger meat contaminated with  E coli . STEC-HUS is not to be confused with atypical HUS (aHUS) which is not infection-related. It is similar to another disease called  thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura  (TTP). Symptoms 
 
 STEC-HUS often begins with vomiting and diarrhea, which may be bloody. Within a week, the person may become weak and irritable. People with this condition may urinate less than normal. Urine output may almost stop. Red blood cell destruction leads to symptoms of  anemia . Early symptoms: Blood in the stools Irritability Fever Lethargy Vomiting  and  diarrhea Weakness Later symptoms: Bruising Decreased consciousness Low urine output No urine output Pallor Seizures  -- rare Skin rash that looks like fine red spots ( petechiae ) Yellow skin (jaundice)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Liver or spleen swelling Nervous system changes  Laboratory tests will show signs of  hemolytic anemia  and  acute renal failure . Tests may include: Blood clotting tests ( PT  and  PTT ) Comprehensive metabolic panel  may show increased levels of  BUN  and  creatinine Complete blood count  (CBC) may show increased white blood cell count and decreased red blood cell count Platelet  count is usually reduced Urinalysis  may reveal blood and protein in the urine Urine protein  test can show the amount of protein in the urine  Other tests: Kidney biopsy Stool culture  may be positive for a certain type of  E coli  bacteria or other bacteria  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may involve: Dialysis Medicines such as corticosteroids Transfusions of packed red blood cells and platelets Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This is a serious illness in both children and adults, and it can cause death. With proper treatment, more than half of people will recover. The outcome is better in children than adults. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blood clotting problems Hemolytic anemia Kidney failure Nervous system problems Too few platelets ( thrombocytopenia ) Uremia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of HUS. Emergency symptoms include: Blood in the stool No urination Reduced alertness (consciousness)  Call your provider if you have had an episode of HUS and your urine output decreases, or you develop other new symptoms. Prevention 
 
 You can prevent the known cause,  E coli , by cooking hamburger and other meats well. You should also avoid contact with unclean water. Alternative Names 
 
 HUS; STEC-HUS  Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Abrams CS. Thrombocytopenia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 172. Ruggenenti R, Cravedi P, Remuzzi G. Microvascular and macrovascular diseases of the kidney. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 35. Van Why SK, Avner ED. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 518. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Anemia 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Hemolysis 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Paleness 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 E. Coli Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia