
 Hemophilia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hemophilia refers to a group of bleeding disorders in which blood clotting takes a long time. There are two forms of hemophilia: Hemophilia A  (classic hemophilia, or factor VIII deficiency) Hemophilia B  (Christmas disease, or factor IX deficiency) Causes 
 
 When you bleed, a series of reactions take place in the body that helps blood clots form. This process is called the coagulation cascade. It involves special proteins called coagulation, or clotting factors. You may have a higher chance of excess bleeding if one or more of these factors are missing or aren't functioning like they should. Hemophilia is caused by the lack of clotting factor VIII or IX in the blood. In most cases, hemophilia is passed down through families (inherited). Most of the time, it is passed to male children. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom of hemophilia is bleeding. Mild cases may not be detected until later in life, after excessive bleeding following surgery or an injury. In the worst cases, bleeding occurs for no reason. Internal bleeding may occur anywhere and bleeding into joints is common. Exams and Tests 
 
 Most often, hemophilia is diagnosed after a person has an abnormal bleeding episode. It can also be diagnosed by a blood test done to detect the problem, if other family members have the condition. Treatment 
 
 The most common treatment is to replace the missing clotting factor in the blood through a vein (intravenous infusions). Special care during surgery needs to be taken if you have this bleeding disorder. So, be sure to tell your surgeon that you have this disorder. It is also very important to share information about your disorder with blood relatives as they may also be affected. Support Groups 
 
 Joining a support group where members share common issues can relieve the stress of a chronic disease. 
  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people with hemophilia are able to do normal activities. But some people have bleeding into the joints, which may limit their activity. A small number of people with hemophilia may die of severe bleeding. Alternative Names 
 
 Hemophilia A; Classic hemophilia; Factor VIII deficiency; Hemophilia B; Christmas disease; Factor IX deficiency Images 
 
 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Carcao M, Moorehead P, Lillicrap D. Hemophilia A and B. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi JI, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 137. Ragni MV. Hemorrhagic disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 174. Read More 
 
 Hemophilia A 
 Hemophilia B 
 Von Willebrand disease 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hemophilia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia