
 Hepatocerebral degeneration 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatocerebral degeneration is a brain disorder that occurs in people with liver damage. Causes 
 
 This condition may occur in any case of acquired liver failure, including severe  hepatitis . Liver damage can lead to the buildup of ammonia and other toxic materials in the body. This happens when the liver does not work properly to break down and eliminate these chemicals. The toxic materials can damage brain tissue. Specific areas of the brain, such as the basal ganglia, are more likely to be injured from liver failure. The basal ganglia help control movement. This condition is the "Non-Wilsonian" type. This means that the liver damage is not caused by copper deposits in the liver, which is a key feature of  Wilson's disease . Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Difficulty walking Impaired intellectual function Jaundice Muscle spasm (myoclonus) Rigidity Shaking of arms, head (tremor) Twitching Uncontrolled body movements ( chorea ) Unsteady walking ( ataxia )  Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs include: Coma Fluid in the abdomen that causes swelling ( ascites ) Gastrointestinal bleeding from enlarged veins in the food pipe (esophageal varices)  A nervous system (neurological) examination may show signs of: Dementia Involuntary movements Walking instability  Laboratory tests may show a high ammonia level in the bloodstream and abnormal liver function. Other tests may include: MRI of the head EEG  (may show general slowing of brain waves) CT scan of the head Treatment 
 
 Treatment helps reduce the toxic chemicals that build up from liver failure. It may include antibiotics or medicines such as lactulose, which lowers the level of ammonia in the blood. A treatment called branched-chain amino acid therapy may also: Improve symptoms Reverse brain damage  There is no specific treatment for the neurologic syndrome, because it is caused by irreversible liver damage. A liver transplant may cure the liver disease. However, this operation may not reverse the symptoms of brain damage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This is a long-term (chronic) condition that may lead to irreversible nervous system (neurological) symptoms. The patient may continue to get worse and may die without a liver transplant. If a transplant is done early in the course of the disease, the neurological syndrome may be reversible. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Hepatic coma Severe brain damage  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any symptoms of liver disease. Prevention 
 
 It is not possible to prevent all forms of liver disease. However, alcoholic and viral hepatitis may be prevented. To reduce your risk of getting alcoholic or viral hepatitis: Avoid risky behaviors, such as IV drug use or unprotected sex. Don't drink, or drink only in moderation.  Alternative Names 
 
 Chronic acquired (Non-Wilsonian) hepatocerebral degeneration Images 
 
 
 Liver anatomy 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tiso G. Cirrhosis and its sequellae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 156. 
 Review Date 12/12/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia