
 Hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatic vein obstruction is a blockage of the  hepatic  vein, which carries blood away from the liver. Causes 
 
 Hepatic vein obstruction prevents blood from flowing out of the liver and back to the heart. This blockage can cause liver damage. Obstruction of this vein can be caused by a  tumor  or growth pressing on the vessel, or by a clot in the vessel (hepatic vein thrombosis). Most often, it is caused by conditions that make blood clots more likely to form, including: Abnormal growth of cells in the bone marrow (myeloproliferative disorders) Cancers Chronic inflammatory or  autoimmune  diseases Infections Inherited (hereditary) or acquired problems with blood clotting Oral contraceptives Pregnancy Hepatic vein blockage is the most common cause of Budd-Chiari syndrome. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal swelling or stretching Pain in the right upper abdomen Vomiting blood Yellowing of the skin (jaundice) Exams and Tests 
 
 One of the signs is swelling of the abdomen from fluid buildup ( ascites ). The liver is often swollen and tender. Tests include: CT scan  or  MRI of the abdomen Doppler ultrasound of the liver veins Liver biopsy Liver function tests Ultrasound  of the liver Treatment 
 
 Treatment varies, depending on the cause of the blockage. Your health care provider may recommend the following medicines: 
   Blood thinners (anticoagulants)
    
   Clot-busting drugs (thrombolytic treatment)
    
   Medicines to treat the liver disease, including ascites
    Surgery may be recommended. This may involve: Angioplasty  and  stent  placement Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt ( TIPS ) Venous shunt surgery  Liver transplant Possible Complications 
 
 Hepatic vein obstruction can get worse and lead to liver failure, which can be life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: 
   You have symptoms of hepatic vein obstruction
    
   You are being treated for this condition and you develop new symptoms
    Alternative Names 
 
 Budd-Chiari syndrome; Hepatic veno-occlusive disease Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 Blood clot formation 
 References 
 
 Hauser SC. Vascular diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 143. Valla DC. Vascular disease of the liver. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Blood clots 
 Hepatic 
 Stent 
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia