
 Hepatitis virus panel 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The hepatitis virus panel is a series of blood tests used to detect current or past infection by  hepatitis A ,  hepatitis B , or  hepatitis C . It can screen blood samples for more than one kind of hepatitis virus at the same time. Antibody  and  antigen  tests can detect each of the different hepatitis viruses. Note: Hepatitis D only causes disease in people who also have hepatitis B. It is not routinely checked on a hepatitis antibody panel. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Blood is most often drawn from a vein the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand. The site is cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). The health care provider wraps an elastic band around the upper arm to apply pressure to the area and make the vein swell with blood. Next, the provider gently inserts a needle into the vein. The blood collects into an airtight tube attached to the needle. The elastic band is removed from your arm. Once the blood has been collected, the needle is removed. The puncture site is covered to stop any bleeding. In infants or young children, a sharp tool called a lancet may be used to puncture the skin and make it bleed. The blood collects into a small glass tube, or onto a slide or test strip. A bandage may be placed over the area if there is any bleeding. The blood sample is sent to a lab to be examined. Blood (serology) tests are used to check for antibodies to each of the hepatitis viruses. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 Some people feel moderate pain when the needle is inserted to draw blood. Others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, you may feel some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test if you have signs of hepatitis. It is used to: Detect current or previous hepatitis infection Determine how contagious a person with hepatitis is Monitor a person who is being treated for hepatitis  The test may be performed for other conditions, such as: Chronic persistent hepatitis Delta agent (hepatitis D) Nephrotic syndrome Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means no hepatitis  antibodies  are found in the blood sample. This is called a negative result. Normal value ranges may vary slightly depending on the lab doing the test. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 There are different tests for hepatitis A and B. A positive test is considered abnormal. A positive test may mean: You currently have a hepatitis infection. This may be a new infection (acute hepatitis), or it may be an infection that you have had for a long time ( chronic  hepatitis). You had a hepatitis infection in the past, but you no longer have the infection and cannot spread it to others.  Hepatitis A test results: IgM anti-hepatitis A virus (HAV) antibodies, you have had a recent infection with hepatitis A Total (IgM and IgG) antibodies to hepatitis A, you have a previous or past infection, or immunity to hepatitis A  Hepatitis B tests: Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), you have an active hepatitis B infection, either recent or chronic Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (Anti-HBc), you have a recent or past hepatitis B infection Antibody to HBsAg (Anti-HBs), you have a past hepatitis B infection or you have received the hepatitis B vaccine and are unlikely to become infected Hepatitis B type e antigen (HBeAg), you have a chronic hepatitis B infection and you are more likely to spread the infection to others through sexual contact or by sharing needles  Antibodies to hepatitis C can most often be detected 4 to 10 weeks after you get the infection. Other types of tests may be done to decide on treatment and monitor the hepatitis C infection. Risks 
 
 Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Hepatitis A antibody test; Hepatitis B antibody test; Hepatitis C antibody test; Hepatitis D antibody test Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Hepatitis B virus 
 Erythema multiforme, circular lesions - hands 
 References 
 
 Pawlotsky J-M, Mchutchinson J. Chronic vialr and autoimmune hepatitis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 151. Pawlotsky J-M, Wedemeyer H. Acute viral hepatitis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 150. Perrillo R. Hepatitis B and D. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Antigen 
 Chronic 
 Delta agent (Hepatitis D) 
 Hepatitis 
 Hepatitis A 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hepatitis A 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 Hepatitis Testing 
 Browse the Encyclopedia