
 Hepatorenal syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatorenal syndrome is a condition in which there is progressive kidney failure. It occurs in a person with  cirrhosis  of the liver. It is a serious complication that can lead to death.  Causes 
 
 Hepatorenal syndrome occurs when the kidneys stop working well in people with serious liver problems. Less urine is removed from the body, so waste products that contain nitrogen build up in the bloodstream ( azotemia ). The disorder occurs in up to 1 in 10 people who are in the hospital with liver failure. It leads to  kidney failure  in people with: Acute liver failure Alcoholic  hepatitis Cirrhosis Infected abdominal fluid Risk factors include: Blood pressure that falls when a person rises or suddenly changes position (orthostatic hypotension) Use of medicines called diuretics ("water pills") Gastrointestinal bleeding Infection Recent  abdominal fluid tap  (paracentesis)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal swelling  due to fluid (called ascites, a symptom of liver disease) Mental  confusion Muscle jerks Dark-colored urine  (a symptom of liver disease) Decreased urine output Nausea and vomiting Weight gain Yellow skin (jaundice, a symptom of liver disease)  Exams and Tests 
 
 This condition is diagnosed after testing to rule out other causes of kidney failure.  A physical exam does not detect kidney failure directly. However, the exam will very often show signs of chronic liver disease, such as: Confusion (often due to  hepatic encephalopathy ) Excess fluid in the abdomen ( ascites ) Jaundice Other signs of liver failure  Other signs include: Abnormal reflexes Smaller testicles Dull sound in the belly area when tapped with the tips of the fingers Increased breast tissue (gynecomastia) Sores (lesions) on the skin  The following may be signs of kidney failure: Very little or no urine output Fluid retention in the abdomen or extremities Increased  BUN  and  creatinine  blood levels Increased  urine specific gravity  and  osmolality Low  blood sodium Very low  urine sodium  concentration  The following may be signs of liver failure: Abnormal prothrombin time ( PT ) Increased blood  ammonia  level Low  blood albumin Paracentesis  shows ascites Signs of  hepatic encephalopathy  (an  EEG  may be done)  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to help the liver work better and to make sure the heart is able to pump enough blood to the body.  Treatment is about the same as for kidney failure from any cause. It includes: Stopping all unnecessary medicines, especially ibuprofen and other NSAIDs, certain antibiotics, and diuretics ("water pills") Having dialysis to improve symptoms Taking medicines to improve blood pressure and help your kidneys work better; infusion of albumin may also be helpful Placing a shunt (known as TIPS) to relieve the symptoms of ascites (this may also help kidney function, but the procedure can be risky) Surgery to place a shunt from the abdominal space to the jugular vein to relieve some symptoms of kidney failure (this procedure is risky and is rarely done) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is often poor. Death often occurs due to an infection or severe bleeding (hemorrhage). Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding Damage to, and failure of, many organ systems End-stage kidney disease Fluid overload and  heart failure  Coma caused by liver failure Secondary infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This disorder most often is diagnosed in the hospital during treatment for a liver disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Cirrhosis - hepatorenal; Liver failure - hepatorenal References 
 
 Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Nevah MI, Fallon MB. Hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome, hepatopulmonary syndrome, and other systemic complications of liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 94. Read More 
 
 Abdominal tap  
 Acute kidney failure 
 Cirrhosis 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver disease 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Urine output - decreased 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Kidney Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia