
 Hepatic hemangioma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hepatic hemangioma is a liver tumor made of widened (dilated) blood vessels. It is not cancerous. Causes 
 
 A hepatic hemangioma is the most common type of liver  tumor  that is not caused by cancer. It may be a birth defect. Hepatic hemangiomas can occur at any time. They are most common in people in their 30s to 50s. Women get these tumors more often than men, and the tumors are often bigger. Babies may develop a type of hepatic hemangioma called benign infantile hemangioendothelioma. This is also called multinodular hepatic hemangiomatosis. This is a rare, noncancerous tumor that has been linked to high rates of heart failure and death in infants. Infants are most often diagnosed by the time they are 6 months old. Symptoms 
 
 Some hemangiomas may cause bleeding or interfere with organ function. Most do not produce symptoms. In rare cases, the hemangioma may rupture. Exams and Tests 
 
 In most cases, hepatic hemangioma is not found until medical pictures are taken of the liver for some other reason. If the hemangioma ruptures, the only sign may be an enlarged liver. Babies with benign infantile hemangioendothelioma may have:  A growth in the abdomen Anemia Signs of  heart failure The following tests may be performed: Blood tests CT scan of the liver Hepatic  angiogram MRI Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) Ultrasound of the abdomen Treatment 
 
 Most of these tumors are treated only if there is ongoing pain. Treatment for infantile hemangioendothelioma depends on the child's growth and development. The following treatments may be needed: Inserting a material in a blood vessel of the liver to block it (embolization) Tying off (ligation) a liver artery Medicines for heart failure Surgery to remove the tumor  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Surgery can cure a tumor in an infant if it is only in one lobe of the liver. Surgery can be done even if the child has heart failure. Possible Complications 
 
 Pregnancy and estrogen-based medicines can cause these tumors to grow. Alternative Names 
 
 Liver hemangioma; Hemangioma of the liver; Cavernous hepatic hemangioma; Infantile hemangioendothelioma; Multinodular hepatic hemangiomatosis Images 
 
 
 Hemangioma - angiogram 
 Hemangioma - CT scan 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Stehr W, Guzzetta PC. Nonmalignant tumors of the liver. In: Boyer TD, Manns MP, Sanyal AJ eds.  Zakim & Boyer's Hepatology: A Textbook of Liver Disease . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 32. Trenor CC, Greene AK. Vascular tumors in childhood. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston W, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Hemangioma 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Liver Diseases 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia