
 Hereditary urea cycle abnormality 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hereditary urea cycle abnormality is an inherited condition. It can cause problems with the removal of waste from the body in the urine. Causes 
 
 The urea cycle is a process in which waste (ammonia) is removed from the body. When you eat proteins, the body breaks them down into amino acids. Ammonia is produced from leftover amino acids, and it must be removed from the body. The liver produces several chemicals (enzymes) that change ammonia into a form called urea, which the body can remove in the urine. If this process is disturbed, ammonia levels begin to rise. Several inherited conditions can cause problems with this waste-removal process. People with a urea cycle disorder are missing a gene that makes the enzymes needed to break down ammonia in the body. These diseases include: Argininosuccinic aciduria Arginase deficiency Carbamyl phosphate synthetase (CPS) deficiency Citrullinemia N-acetyl glutamate synthetase (NAGS) deficiency Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency As a group, these disorders occur in 1 in 30,000 newborns. OTC deficiency is the most common of these disorders. Boys are more often affected by OTC deficiency than girls. Girls are rarely affected. Those girls who are affected have milder symptoms and can develop the disease later in life. To get the other types of disorders, you need to receive a non-working copy of the gene from both parents. Sometimes parents don't know they carry the gene until their child gets the disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Typically, the baby begins nursing well and seems normal. However, over time the baby develops poor feeding, vomiting, and sleepiness, which may be so deep that the baby is difficult to awaken. This usually occurs within the first week after birth. Symptoms include: Confusion Decreased food intake Dislike of foods that contain protein  Increased sleepiness, difficulty waking up Nausea, vomiting  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will often diagnose these disorders when the child is still an infant. Signs may include: Abnormal amino acids in blood and urine Abnormal level of orotic acid in blood or urine High blood ammonia level Normal level of acid in blood  Tests may include: Genetic tests Liver biopsy MRI  or  CT scan Treatment 
 
 Limiting protein in the diet can help treat these disorders by reducing the amount of nitrogen waste the body produces. (The waste is in the form of ammonia.). Special low-protein infant and toddler formulas are available. It is important that a provider guides protein intake. The provider can balance the amount of protein the baby gets so that it is enough for growth, but not enough to cause symptoms. It is very important for people with these disorders to avoid fasting. People with urea cycle abnormalities must also be very careful under times of stress, such as when they have infections. Stress, such as a fever, can cause the body to break down its own proteins. These extra proteins can make it hard for the abnormal urea cycle to remove the byproducts. Develop a plan with your provider for when you are sick to avoid all protein, drink high carbohydrate drinks, and get enough fluids. Most people with urea cycle disorders will need to stay in the hospital at some point. During such times, they may be treated with medicines that help the body remove nitrogen-containing wastes. Dialysis may help rid the body of excess ammonia during extreme illness. Support Groups 
 
 National Urea Cycle Disorders Forum:  www.nucdf.org/support.htm Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well people do depends on: Which urea cycle abnormality they have How severe it is How early it is discovered How closely they follow a protein-restricted diet Babies diagnosed in the first week of life and put on a protein-restricted diet right away do well. Sticking to the diet can lead to normal adult intelligence. Repeatedly not following the diet or having stress-induced symptoms can lead to brain swelling and brain damage. Major stresses, such as surgery or accidents, can be complicated for people with this condition. Extreme care is needed to avoid problems during such periods. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can include: Coma Confusion and eventually disorientation Death Increase in blood ammonia level Swelling of the brain  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 As with most inherited diseases, there is no way to prevent these disorders. Prenatal testing is available. Genetic testing before an embryo is implanted may be available for those using in vitro so the specific genetic cause is known. A dietician is important to help plan and update a protein-restricted diet as the child grows. Prevention 
 
 As with most inherited diseases, there is no way to prevent these disorders. Prenatal testing is available. Genetic testing before an embryo is implanted may be available for those using  in vitro  so the specific genetic cause is known. Teamwork between parents, the affected child, and doctors can help prevent severe illness. Alternative Names 
 
 Abnormality of the urea cycle - hereditary; Urea cycle - hereditary abnormality Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 Urea cycle 
 References 
 
 Lichter-Konecki U, Batshaw ML. Inborn errors of urea synthesis. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Schor NF, eds.  Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology: Principles and Practice . 5th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 33. Rezvani I, Yudkoff M. Urea cycle and hyperammonemia (arginine, citrulline, ornithine). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 85. 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia