
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cholesterol is a fat (also called a lipid) that your body needs to work properly. Too much bad cholesterol can increase your chance of getting heart disease, stroke, and other problems.
 The medical term for high blood cholesterol is lipid disorder, hyperlipidemia, or hypercholesterolemia. Causes 
 
 There are many types of cholesterol. The ones talked about most are: Total cholesterol -- all the cholesterols combined High density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol -- often called "good" cholesterol Low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol -- often called "bad" cholesterol  For many people, abnormal cholesterol levels are partly due to an unhealthy lifestyle. This often includes  eating a diet that is high in fat . Other lifestyle factors are: Being overweight Lack of exercise  Some health conditions can also lead to abnormal cholesterol, including:  Diabetes Kidney disease Polycystic ovary syndrome Pregnancy and other conditions that increase levels of female hormones Underactive thyroid gland  Medicines such as certain birth control pills, diuretics (water pills), beta-blockers, and some medicines used to treat depression may also raise cholesterol levels. Several disorders that are passed down through families lead to abnormal cholesterol and triglyceride levels. They include:  Familial combined hyperlipidemia Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia Familial hypercholesterolemia Familial hypertriglyceridemia  Smoking does not cause higher cholesterol levels, but it can reduce your HDL (good) cholesterol. Exams and Tests 
 
 A cholesterol test is done to diagnose a lipid disorder. Different experts recommend different starting ages. Recommended starting ages are between 20 to 35 for men and 20 to 45 for women. Adults with normal cholesterol levels do not need to have the test repeated for 5 years. Repeat testing sooner if changes occur in lifestyle (including weight gain and diet). Adults with a history of elevated cholesterol, diabetes, kidney problems, heart disease, and other conditions require more frequent testing.  It is important to work with your health care provider to set your cholesterol goals. Newer guidelines steer doctors away from targeting specific levels of cholesterol. Instead, it recommends different medicines and doses depending on a person's history and risk factor profile. General targets are: LDL: 70 to 130 mg/dL (lower numbers are better) HDL: More than 50 mg/dL (high numbers are better) Total cholesterol: Less than 200 mg/dL (lower numbers are better) Triglycerides: 10 to 150 mg/dL (lower numbers are better)  If your cholesterol results are abnormal, you may also have other tests such as:  Blood sugar (glucose) test to look for diabetes Kidney function tests Thyroid function tests to look for an underactive thyroid gland  Treatment 
 
 Steps you can take to improve their cholesterol levels, and help prevent heart disease and a heart attack include: Quit smoking. This is the single biggest change you can make to reduce your risk of heart attack and stroke. Eat foods that are naturally low in fat. These include whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. Use low-fat toppings, sauces, and dressings. Avoid foods that are high in saturated fat. Exercise regularly. Lose weight if you are overweight. Your provider may want you to take medicine for your cholesterol if lifestyle changes do not work. This will depend on: Your age Whether or not you have heart disease, diabetes, or other blood flow problems Whether you smoke or are overweight Whether you have high blood pressure or diabetes  You are more likely to need  medicine to lower your cholesterol :  If you have heart disease or diabetes If you are at risk for heart disease (even if you do not yet have any heart problems)  Almost everyone else may get health benefits from LDL cholesterol that is lower than 160 to 190 mg/dL. There are several types of drugs to help lower blood cholesterol levels. The drugs work in different ways. Statins are one kind of drug that lowers cholesterol and has been proven to reduce the chance of heart disease.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 High cholesterol levels can lead to  hardening of the arteries , also called atherosclerosis. This occurs when fat, cholesterol, and other substances build up in the walls of arteries and form hard structures called plaques. Over time, these plaques can block the arteries and cause heart disease, stroke, and other symptoms or problems throughout the body. 
Disorders that are passed down through families often lead to higher cholesterol levels that are harder to control.
 Alternative Names 
 
 Lipid disorders; Hyperlipoproteinemia; Hyperlipidemia; Dyslipidemia; Hypercholesterolemia Images 
 
 
 Cholesterol producers 
 Coronary artery disease 
 Cholesterol 
 Developmental process of atherosclerosis 
 References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Haney EM, Huffman LH, Bougatsos C, et al. Screening for lipid disorders in children and adolescents. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2007 Jul. Report No.: 07-0598-EF-1. PMID: 20722144  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20722144 .  Helfand M, Carson S. Screening for lipid disorders in adults: selective update of 2001 US Preventive Services Task Force Review. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2008 Jun. Report No.: 08-05114-EF-1. PMID: 20722146  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20722146 .  Semenkovich CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for high blood pressure in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2015;163(10):778-786. PMID: 26458123  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26458123 . Stone NJ, Robinson J, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  Circulation . 2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S1-S45. PMID: 24222016  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24222016 . US Preventive Services Task Force. Draft Recommendation Statement  Statin Use for the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults: Preventive Medication . Updated December 2015.  www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/draft-recommendation-statement175/statin-use-in-adults-preventive-medication1 . Accessed July 21, 2016. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Coronary heart disease 
 Cushing syndrome 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Overweight 
 Stroke 
 Triglyceride level 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Angina - discharge 
 Angioplasty and stent - heart - discharge  
 Antiplatelet drugs - P2Y12 inhibitors 
 Aspirin and heart disease 
 Being active after your heart attack 
 Being active when you have heart disease 
 Butter, margarine, and cooking oils 
 Cardiac catheterization - discharge  
 Cholesterol and lifestyle 
 Cholesterol - drug treatment 
 Cholesterol - what to ask your doctor  
 Controlling your high blood pressure 
 Diabetes - preventing heart attack and stroke 
 Dietary fats explained 
 Fast food tips 
 Heart attack - discharge 
 Heart bypass surgery - discharge 
 Heart bypass surgery - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Heart disease - risk factors 
 Heart failure - fluids and diuretics 
 Heart failure - home monitoring 
 Heart pacemaker - discharge 
 How to read food labels 
 Low-salt diet  
 Mediterranean diet 
 Stroke - discharge  
 Type 2 diabetes - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cholesterol 
 Browse the Encyclopedia