
 Histrionic personality disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Histrionic personality disorder is a mental condition in which people act in a very emotional and dramatic way that draws attention to themselves. Causes 
 
 Causes of histrionic personality disorder are unknown. Genes and early childhood events may be responsible. It is diagnosed more often in women than in men. Doctors believe that more men may have the disorder than are diagnosed. Histrionic personality disorder usually begins by late teens or early 20s. Symptoms 
 
 People with this disorder are usually able to function at a high level and can be successful socially and at work. Symptoms include: Acting or looking overly seductive Being easily influenced by other people Being overly concerned with their looks Being overly dramatic and emotional Being overly sensitive to criticism or disapproval Believing that relationships are more intimate than they actually are Blaming failure or disappointment on others Constantly seeking reassurance or approval Having a low tolerance for frustration or delayed gratification Needing to be the center of attention ( self-centeredness ) Quickly changing emotions, which may seem shallow to others Exams and Tests 
 
 Histrionic personality disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. The provider can diagnose histrionic personality disorder by looking at the person's: Behavior Overall appearance Psychological evaluation  Treatment 
 
 People with this condition often seek treatment when they have depression or anxiety from failed romantic relationships or other conflicts with people. Medicine may help the symptoms. Talk therapy is the best treatment for the condition itself. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Histrionic personality disorder can improve with talk therapy and sometimes medicines. Left untreated, it can cause problems in people's personal lives and prevent them doing their best at work. Possible Complications 
 
 Histrionic personality disorder may affect a person's social or romantic relationships. The person may be unable to cope with losses or failures. The person may change jobs often because of boredom and not being able to deal with frustration. They may crave new things and excitement, which leads to risky situations. All of these factors may lead to a higher chance of  depression . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your provider or mental health professional if you or someone you know has symptoms of histrionic personality disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Personality disorder - histrionic; Attention seeking - histrionic personality disorder References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Histrionic personality disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013;667-669. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Hopwood CJ. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Depression - overview 
 
 Review Date 11/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia