
 HLA-B27 antigen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 HLA-B27 is a blood test to look for a protein that is found on the surface of white blood cells. The protein is called human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27). Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) are proteins that help the body's immune system tell the difference between its own cells and foreign, harmful substances. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time, blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 In most cases, no special steps are needed to prepare for the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, you may feel moderate pain, or only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your health care provider may order this test to help determine the cause of joint pain, stiffness, or swelling. The test may be done along with other tests, including: C-reactive protein Erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) Rheumatoid factor X-rays  HLA testing   is also used to match donated tissue in a person who is getting an organ transplant. For example, it may be done when a person needs a  kidney transplant  or  bone marrow transplant . Normal Results 
 
 A normal (negative) result means HLA-B27 is absent. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A positive test means HLA-B27 is present. It suggests a greater-than-average risk for developing or having certain autoimmune disorders. An autoimmune disorder is a condition that occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys healthy body tissue. A positive result can help your provider make a diagnosis of a form of arthritis called spondyloarthritis. This kind of arthritis includes the following disorders: Ankylosing spondylitis Arthritis related to  Crohn disease  or ulcerative colitis Psoriatic arthritis (arthritis associated with psoriasis) Reactive arthritis Sacroiliitis (inflammation of the sacroiliac joint) Uveitis If there are symptoms or signs of an autoimmune disease, a positive HLA-B27 test may confirm the diagnosis. However, HLA-B27 is normally found in a small number of white people and does not always mean you have a disease. Risks 
 
 Risks from having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling light-headed Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Human leukocyte antigen B27 Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Inman RD. The spondyloarthropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 273. Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewé R, et al. The Assessment of SpondyloArthritis International Society classification criteria for peripheral spondyloarthritis and for spondyloarthritis in general.  Ann Rheum Dis.  2011;70:25. PMID: 21109520  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21109520 . Read More 
 
 Ankylosing spondylitis 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Histocompatibility antigen test 
 Kidney transplant 
 Reactive arthritis 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ankylosing Spondylitis 
 Infectious Arthritis 
 Organ Transplantation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia