
 Hunter syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hunter syndrome is a disease in which long chains of sugar molecules (glycosaminoglycans, formerly called  mucopolysaccharides ) are not broken down correctly and build up in the body. The syndrome belongs to a group of diseases called mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS). Specifically, it is known as MPS II. See also: MPS I H ( Hurler syndrome ) MPS IV ( Morquio syndrome ) MPS III ( Sanfilippo syndrome ) MPS I S ( Scheie syndrome )  Causes 
 
 Hunter syndrome is an inherited condition, which means it is passed down through families. The affected gene is on the X chromosome. Therefore, boys are most often affected. Their mothers do not have symptoms of the disease, but they carry a nonworking copy of the gene. The condition is caused by a lack of the  enzyme  iduronate sulfatase. Without this enzyme, chains of sugar molecules build up in various body tissues, causing damage. The early-onset, severe form of the disease begins shortly after age 2. A late-onset, mild form causes less severe symptoms to appear later in life.  Symptoms 
 
 In the early-onset, severe form, symptoms include: Aggressive behavior Hyperactivity Mental function gets worse over time Severe  intellectual disability Jerky body movements  In the late (mild) form, there can be mild to no mental deficiency. In both forms, symptoms include: Carpal tunnel syndrome Coarse features of the face Deafness  (gets worse over time) Increased hair growth Joint stiffness Large head Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam and tests in someone with Hunter syndrome may show: Abnormal  retina  (back of the eye) Decreased iduronate sulfatase enzyme in blood serum or cells Heart murmur  and leaky heart valves Enlarged liver Enlarged spleen Hernia in the groin Joint  contractures  (from joint stiffness) Jerky movements  Tests may include: Enzyme study Genetic testing for a change in the iduronate sulfatase gene Urine test for heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate  Treatment 
 
 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the first treatment for Hunter syndrome. The medicine, called idursulfase (Elaprase), is given through a vein (IV, intravenously). Talk to your health care provider for more information. Bone marrow transplant  has been tried for the early-onset form, but the results can vary. Each health problem caused by this disease should be treated separately. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with the early-onset (severe) form usually live for 10 to 20 years. People with the late-onset (mild) form usually live 20 to 60 years. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur: Airway obstruction Carpal tunnel syndrome Hearing loss that gets worse over time Loss of ability to complete daily living activities Joint stiffness that leads to contractures Mental function that gets worse over time  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You or your child has a group of these symptoms You know you are a genetic carrier and are considering having children  Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for couples who want to have children and who have a family history of Hunter syndrome. Prenatal testing is available. Carrier testing for female relatives of affected males is available at a few centers. Alternative Names 
 
 Mucopolysaccharidosis type II; Iduronate sulfatase deficiency References 
 
 Ma, C, Ali S, Dorshi N, Dominguez R. Storage diseases. In: Pope TL, Bloem HL, Beltran J, Morrison WB, eds.  Musculoskeletal Imaging . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 82. Muenzer J, Wraith JE, Beck M, et al. A phase II/III clinical study of enzyme replacement therapy with idursulfase in mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunter syndrome).  Genet Med . 2006 Aug;8(8):465-73. PMID: 16912578  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16912578 .  Pyeritz RE. Inherited diseases of connective tissue. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 260. Wraith JE. Mucopolysaccharidoses and oligosaccharidoses. In: Saudubray JM, van den Berghe G, Walter JH, eds.  Inborn Metabolic Diseases: Diagnosis and Treatment . 5th ed. New York, NY: Springer; 2012:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Chromosome 
 Enzyme 
 Intellectual disability 
 Mucopolysaccharides 
 Spasticity 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Winston-Salem, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia