
 Hydrochloric acid poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hydrochloric acid is a clear, poisonous liquid. It is highly corrosive, which means it immediately causes severe damage, such as burning, on contact. This article discusses poisoning due to swallowing or breathing in hydrochloric acid. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Hydrochloric acid Where Found 
 
 Hydrochloric acid is found in: Certain fertilizers Pool chemicals Soldering  fluxes Toilet bowl and other porcelain cleaners  This list is not all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms from swallowing hydrochloric acid may include: Abdominal pain  - severe Breathing difficulty due to swelling of throat Chest pain - severe Drooling  Fever Mouth pain - severe Rapid drop in blood pressure Throat pain - severe Vomiting blood Symptoms from breathing in hydrochloric acid: Bluish color to lips and fingernails Chest tightness Choking Coughing Coughing up blood Dizziness Low blood pressure Rapid pulse Shortness of breath Weakness If the poison touches your skin or eyes, you may have: Blisters Burns Pain Vision loss Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air.  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 If possible, determine the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) When it was swallowed or inhaled How much was swallowed or inhaled  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Camera down the throat to see burns in the airway (bronchoscopy) Camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and stomach (endoscopy) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the nose into the stomach to remove any remaining acid  Note: Activated charcoal does not effectively treat (adsorb) hydrochloric acid. For skin exposure, treatment may include: Surgical removal of burned skin (debridement) Transfer to a hospital that specializes in burn care Washing of the skin (irrigation), possibly every few hours for several days  The person may need to be admitted to a hospital to continue treatment. Surgery may be needed if the esophagus, stomach, or intestine have holes (perforations) from the acid. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Swallowing poison can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, and stomach are possible. Holes (perforations) in the esophagus and stomach may result in serious infections in the chest and abdominal cavities, which may result in death. References 
 
 Medical Management Guidelines for Hydrogen Chloride. Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR). Atlanta, GA.  Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 1/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia