
 Hydrogen peroxide poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hydrogen peroxide is a liquid commonly used to fight germs. Hydrogen peroxide poisoning occurs when large amounts of the liquid are swallowed or get in the lungs or eyes. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Hydrogen peroxide can be poisonous if it is not used correctly. Where Found 
 
 Hydrogen peroxide is used in these products: Hydrogen peroxide Hair bleach Some contact lens cleaners Note: Household hydrogen peroxide has a 3% concentration. That means it contains 97% water and 3% hydrogen peroxide.  Hair bleaches  are stronger. They usually have a concentration of more than 6%. Some industrial-strength solutions contain more than 10% hydrogen peroxide. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a hydrogen peroxide poisoning include: Abdominal pain and cramping Breathing difficulty (if large concentrations are swallowed) Body aches Burns in the mouth and throat (if swallowed) Chest pain Eye burns (if it gets in the eyes) Seizures (rare) Stomach swelling Temporary white color to the skin Vomiting (sometimes with blood) Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed or got into eyes or on skin Amount swallowed, in eyes, or on skin Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Tube down the throat into the stomach (gastric tube) to relieve gas pressure  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most contact with household-strength hydrogen peroxide is fairly harmless. Exposure to industrial-strength hydrogen peroxide can be dangerous. Passing a tube with a camera through the mouth into the stomach (endoscopy) may be required to stop internal bleeding. References 
 
 Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. White SR, Hedge MW. Gastrointestinal toxicology. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 13. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia