
 Hypervitaminosis D 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypervitaminosis D is a condition that occurs after taking very high doses of  vitamin D . Causes 
 
 The cause is excess intake of vitamin D. The doses need to be very high, far above what most medical providers normally prescribe. There has been a lot of confusion about vitamin D supplementation. It is extremely unusual for anybody to need more than 2,000 IU of vitamin D a day. For most people, vitamin D toxicity only occurs with Vitamin D doses above 10,000 IU per day. Symptoms 
 
 An excess of vitamin D causes abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia). This can severely damage the kidneys, soft tissues, and bones over time. Constipation Decreased appetite  (anorexia) Dehydration Fatigue Frequent urination Irritability Muscle weakness Vomiting Excessive thirst ( polydipsia ) High blood pressure Passing large amounts of urine ( polyuria )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Calcium in the blood Calcium in the urine 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D levels Serum phosphorus X-ray of the bone Treatment 
 
 Your provider will likely tell you to stop taking vitamin D. In severe cases, other treatment may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is expected, but permanent kidney damage can occur. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that can result from taking too much vitamin D over a long time include: Dehydration Hypercalcemia Kidney damage Kidney stones  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You or your child shows symptoms of hypervitaminosis D and has been taking more vitamin D than the recommended daily allowance You or your child shows symptoms and has been taking a prescription or over-the-counter form of vitamin D  Prevention 
 
 To prevent this condition, pay careful attention to the correct vitamin D dose. Alternative Names 
 
 Vitamin D toxicity References 
 
 Greenbaum LA. Rickets and hypervitaminosis D. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 51. Gropper SS, Smith JL. Fat-soluble vitamins. In: Gropper SS, Smith JL, eds.  Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism . 6th ed Independence, KY: Wadsworth Publishing; 2012:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Vitamin D 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vitamin D 
 Browse the Encyclopedia