
 Hyperelastic skin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hyperelastic skin is skin that can be stretched beyond what is considered normal. The skin returns to normal after it is stretched. Considerations 
 
 Hyperelasticity occurs when there is a problem with how the body makes collagen fibers. Collagen is a type of protein that makes up much of the body's tissue. Causes 
 
 Hyperelastic skin is most often seen in people who have  Ehlers-Danlos  syndrome. People with this disorder have very elastic skin. They also have joints that can be bent more than is normally possible. For this reason, they are sometimes referred to as rubber men or women. Other conditions that may cause skin that is easily stretched include: Marfan syndrome (genetic disorder of human connective tissue) Osteogenesis imperfecta (congenital bone disorder characterized by brittle bones) Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (rare genetic disorder that causes fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibers in some tissues) Subcutaneous T-cell lymphoma Sun-related changes of older skin  Home Care 
 
 You need to take special steps to avoid skin damage when you have this condition because your skin is more delicate than normal. You are more likely to get cuts and scrapes and scars may stretch and become more visible.  Talk to your health care provider about what you can do for this problem. Get skin check-ups often. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Your skin appears to be very stretchy Your child appears to have delicate skin  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will do a physical exam to assess your skin, bones, muscles, and joints. Some questions your provider might ask about you or your child are: Did the skin appear abnormal at birth, or did this develop over time? Is there a history of the skin becoming damaged easily, or being slow to heal? Have you or any member of your family been diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome? What other symptoms are present?  Alternative Names 
 
 India rubber skin Images 
 
 
 Ehlers-Danlos, hyperelasticity of the skin 
 References 
 
 Islam MP, Roach ES. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, eds.  Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 65.  Morelli JG. Diseases of the dermis. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 651.  Read More 
 
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Richard J. Moskowitz, MD, dermatologist in private practice, Mineola, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia