
 Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome is a rare, inherited disease. It causes problems with the skin, sinuses, lungs, bones, and teeth. Causes 
 
 Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome is also called Job syndrome. It is named after the biblical character Job whose faithfulness was tested by an affliction with draining skin sores and  pustules . People with this condition have long-term, severe skin infections. The symptoms are most often present in childhood, but because the disease is so rare, it often takes years before a correct diagnosis is made. Recent research suggests that the disease is often caused by a genetic change (mutation) that takes place in the STAT3  gene  on  chromosome  4. How this gene abnormality causes the symptoms of the disease is not well understood. However, people with the disease have a higher-than-normal level of an  antibody  called IgE. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Bone and tooth defects, including fractures and losing the baby teeth late Eczema Skin  abscesses  and infection Repeated  sinus infections Repeated lung infections
    Exams and Tests 
 
 An eye exam may reveal signs of  dry eye syndrome . A physical exam may also show: Curving of the spine ( kyphoscoliosis ) Osteomyelitis Repeat sinus infections A chest x-ray may reveal lung abscesses. Tests used to confirm the diagnosis include: Absolute eosinophil count CBC  with  blood differential Serum globulin electrophoresis  to look for high blood IgE level Other tests that may be done: CT scan of the chest Cultures of the infected site Special blood tests to check parts of the  immune system X-ray of the bones  
CT scan of the sinuses 
  A scoring system that combines the different problems of Hyper IgE syndrome is used to help make the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for this condition. The goal of treatment is to control the infections. Medicines include: Antibiotics Antifungal and antiviral medicines (when appropriate) Sometimes, surgery is needed to drain abscesses. Gamma globulin given through a vein (IV) may help build up the immune system if you have severe infections. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hyper IgE syndrome is a lifelong chronic condition. Each new infection requires treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Repeated infections Sepsis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of Hyper IgE syndrome. Prevention 
 
 There is no proven way to prevent Hyper IgE syndrome. Good general hygiene is helpful. Some providers may recommend preventive antibiotics for people who develop many infections, especially with  Staphylococcus aureus . This treatment does not change the condition, but it can lessen its complications. Alternative Names 
 
 Job syndrome; Hyper IgE syndrome References 
 
 Fischer A. Primary Immune Deficiency Diseases. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Loscalzo J. eds.  Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine . 19th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2015;chap 374. Hsu AP, Davis J, Puck JM, et al. Autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome.  Gene Reviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2012;6. PMID: 20301786  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301786 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Read More 
 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 Chronic 
 Pustules 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Immune System and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia