
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is inflammation of the lungs due to breathing in a foreign substance, usually certain types of dust, fungus, or molds. Causes 
 
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis usually occurs in people who work in places where there are high levels of organic dusts, fungus, or molds. Long-term exposure can lead to lung inflammation and acute  lung disease . Over time, the acute condition turns into long-lasting (chronic) lung disease. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis may also be caused by fungi or bacteria in humidifiers, heating systems, and air conditioners found in homes and offices. Exposure to certain chemicals, such as isocyanates or acid anhydrides, can also lead to hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Examples of hypersensitivity pneumonitis include: Bird fancier's lung:  This is the most common type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. It is caused by repeated or intense exposure to proteins found in the feathers or droppings of many species of birds. Farmer's lung:  This type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is caused by exposure to dust from moldy hay, straw, and grain. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis often occur 4 to 6 hours after you have left the area where the offending substance is found. This makes it difficult to find a connection between your activity and the disease. Symptoms might resolve before you go back to the area where you encountered the substance. Symptoms may include: Chills Cough Fever Malaise  (feeling ill) Shortness of breath Symptoms of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis may include: Breathlessness, especially with activity Cough, often dry Loss of appetite Unintentional weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Your dosctor may hear abnormal lung sounds called crackles (rales) when listening to your chest with a stethoscope. Lung changes due to chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis may be seen on a  chest x-ray . Other tests may include: Aspergillus precipitin  test Bronchoscopy  with washings, biopsy, and bronchoalveolar lavage 
  Complete blood count ( CBC ) High-resolution  CT scan of the chest Hypersensitivity pneumonitis  antibody  panels Krebs von den Lungen-6 assay (KL-6) Pulmonary function tests Surgical lung biopsy Treatment 
 
 First, the offending substance must be identified. Treatment involves avoiding this substance in the future. Some people may need to change jobs if they cannot avoid the substance at work. If you have a chronic form of this disease, your doctor may recommend that you take glucocorticoids (anti-inflammatory medicines). Sometimes treatments used for asthma can help people with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most symptoms go away when you avoid or limit your exposure to the material that caused the problem. Possible Complications 
 
 The chronic form of this disease may lead to  pulmonary fibrosis . This is a scarring of the lung tissue that often is not reversible. Eventually, end-stage lung disease and respiratory failure can occur. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Prevention 
 
 The chronic form can be prevented by avoiding the material that causes the lung inflammation. Alternative Names 
 
 Extrinsic allergic alveolitis; Farmer's lung; Mushroom picker's disease; Humidifier or air-conditioner lung; Bird breeder's or bird fancier's lung Images 
 
 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Douglass JA, Sandrini A, Holgate ST, O'Hehir RE. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. In: Adkinson NF, Bochner BS, Burks W, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 61. Patterson KC, Rose CS. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Allergen 
 Chest x-ray 
 Interstitial lung disease 
 Lung disease 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 Interstitial Lung Diseases 
 Molds 
 Occupational Health 
 Browse the Encyclopedia