
 Hypospadias 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypospadias is a birth (congenital) defect in which the opening of the urethra is on the underside of the penis. The urethra is the tube that drains urine from the bladder. In males, the opening of the urethra is normally at the end of the penis. Causes 
 
 Hypospadias occurs in up to 4 in 1,000 newborn boys. The cause is often unknown.  Sometimes, the condition is passed down through families.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on how severe the problem is.  Most often, boys with this condition have the opening of the urethra near the tip of the penis on the underside.  More severe forms of hypospadias occur when the opening is in the middle or base of the penis. Rarely, the opening is located in or behind the scrotum. This condition may cause a downward curve of the penis during an erection. Erections are common in infant boys. Other symptoms include: Abnormal spraying of urine Having to sit down to urinate Foreskin that makes the penis looks like it has a "hood"  Exams and Tests 
 
 This problem is almost always diagnosed soon after birth during a physical exam. Imaging tests may be done to look for other congenital defects. Treatment 
 
 Infants with hypospadias should not be circumcised. The foreskin should be kept for use in later surgical repair. In most cases, surgery is done before the child starts school. Today, most urologists recommend repair before the child is 18 months old. Surgery can be done as young as 4 months old. During the surgery, the penis is straightened and the opening is corrected using tissue grafts from the foreskin. The repair may require several surgeries. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Results after surgery are most often good. In some cases, more surgery is needed to correct  fistulas  or a return of the abnormal penis curve. Most males can have normal adult sexual activity.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your son has: A curved penis during an erection Opening to the urethra that is not on the tip of the penis  References 
 
 Elder JS. Anomalies of the penis and urethra. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 538. Kraft KH, Shukla AR, Canning DA. Hypospadias.  Urol Clin North Am . 2010;37:167-81. PMID: 20569796  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20569796 .  Snodgrass WT. Hypospadias. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 130. Read More 
 
 Hypospadias repair 
 Penis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Hypospadias repair - discharge  
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Penis Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia