
 Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypogonadism  is a condition in which the male  testes  or the female ovaries produce little or no sex hormones. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is a form of hypogonadism that is due to a problem with the pituitary gland or hypothalamus.  Causes 
 
 HH is caused by a lack of hormones that normally stimulate the ovaries or testes: gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Normally:  The hypothalamus in the brain releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).  This hormone stimulates the pituitary gland to release FSH and LH.  These hormones tell the female ovaries or the male testes to release hormones that lead to normal sexual development in puberty. Any change in this hormone release chain causes a lack of sex hormones and prevents normal sexual maturity. There are several causes of HH: Damage to the pituitary gland or hypothalamus from surgery, injury, tumor, infection, or radiation Genetic defects  High doses or long-term use of opioid or steroid (glucocorticoid) medicines Severe stress Nutritional problems (both rapid weight gain or weight loss) Chronic medical diseases, including chronic inflammation or infections Certain medical conditions, such as  iron overload Kallmann syndrome is an inherited form of HH. Some people with this condition also have anosmia (loss of the sense of smell). Symptoms 
 
 Children: Lack of development at puberty (development may be very late or incomplete) In girls, a lack of breasts and menstrual periods  In boys, no development of sex characteristics, such as enlargement of the testes and penis, deepening of the voice, and facial hair Inability to smell (in some cases) Short stature  (in some cases) Adults: Loss of interest in sex (libido) in men Loss of menstrual periods (amenorrhea) in women Decreased energy and interest in activities Loss of muscle mass in men Weight gain
  Mood changes Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be done include: Blood tests to measure hormone levels such as FSH, LH, and TSH, prolactin, testosterone and estradiol LH response to GnRH MRI of the pituitary gland/hypothalamus (to look for a tumor or other growth) Genetic testing  Blood tests to check for iron level Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the source of the problem, but may involve: Injections of  testosterone  (in males)
  Slow-release testosterone skin patch (in males) Testosterone gels (in males) Estrogen and progesterone pills or skin patches (in females) GnRH injections  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The right hormone treatment will cause puberty to start and may restore fertility. If the condition begins after puberty or in adulthood, symptoms will often improve with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from HH include: Delayed puberty Early menopause (in females)  Infertility Low bone density and fractures later in life Low self-esteem due to late start of puberty (emotional support may be helpful) Sexual problems, such as low libido When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if:  Your child does not start puberty at the appropriate time  You are a woman under 40 and your menstrual cycles stop You have lost armpit or pubic hair You are a man and you have decreased interest in sex Alternative Names 
 
 Gonadotropin deficiency; Secondary hypogonadism Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pituitary gland 
 Pituitary hormones 
 References 
 
 Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Delayed puberty. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 122. Molitch ME. Anterior pituitary. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 224. Silveira LF, Latronico AC. Approach to the patient with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2013;98(5):1781-1788. PMID: 23650335  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23650335 . Read More 
 
 Empty sella syndrome 
 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) blood test 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Infertility 
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Testes 
 
 Review Date 7/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endocrine Diseases 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia