
 Hypovolemic shock 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypovolemic  shock  is an emergency condition in which severe blood or fluid loss makes the heart unable to pump enough blood to the body. This type of shock can cause many organs to stop working. Causes 
 
 Losing about a fifth or more of the normal amount of blood in your body causes hypovolemic shock. Blood loss can be due to: Bleeding from cuts Bleeding from other injuries Internal bleeding, such as in the gastrointestinal tract The amount of circulating blood in your body may drop when you lose too many other body fluids. This can be due to: Burns Diarrhea Excessive perspiration Vomiting Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Anxiety  or agitation Cool, clammy skin Confusion Decreased or no urine output General  weakness Pale skin color  (pallor) Rapid breathing Sweating , moist skin Unconsciousness The greater and more rapid the blood loss, the more severe the symptoms of shock. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam will show signs of shock, including: Low blood pressure Low body temperature Rapid pulse, often weak and thready  Tests that may be done include: Blood chemistry, including kidney function tests and those tests looking for evidence of heart muscle damage Complete blood count ( CBC ) CT  scan, ultrasound, or  x-ray  of suspected areas Echocardiogram : sound wave test of heart structure and function Endoscopy : tube placed in the mouth to the stomach (upper endoscopy) or colonoscopy (tube placed through the anus to the large bowel) Right heart (Swan-Ganz) catheterization Urinary catheterization (tube placed into the bladder to measure urine output)  In some cases, other tests may be done as well. Treatment 
 
 Get medical help right away. In the meantime, follow these steps: Keep the person comfortable and warm (to avoid  hypothermia ). Have the person lie flat with the feet lifted about 12 inches (30 centimeters) to increase circulation. However, if the person has a head, neck, back, or leg injury, do not change the person's position unless they are in immediate danger. Do not give fluids by mouth. If person is having an  allergic reaction , treat the allergic reaction, if you know how. If the person must be carried, try to keep them flat, with the head down and feet lifted. Stabilize the head and neck before moving a person with a suspected spinal injury.  The goal of hospital treatment is to replace blood and fluids. An  intravenous  (IV) line will be put into the person's arm to allow blood or blood products to be given. Medicines such as dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine may be needed to increase blood pressure and the amount of blood pumped out of the heart (cardiac output). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms and outcomes can vary, depending on: Amount of blood/fluid volume lost Rate of blood /fluid loss Illness or injury causing the loss Underlying chronic medication conditions, such as diabetes and heart, lung, and kidney disease In general, people with milder degrees of shock tend to do better than those with more severe shock. Severe hypovolemic shock may lead to death, even with immediate medical attention. Older adults are more likely to have poor outcomes from shock. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Kidney damage Brain damage Gangrene of arms or legs, sometimes leading to amputation Heart attack Other organ damage Death  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Hypovolemic shock is a medical emergency. Call the local emergency number (such as 911) or take the person to the emergency room. Prevention 
 
 Preventing shock is easier than trying to treat it once it happens. Quickly treating the cause will reduce the risk of developing severe shock. Early first aid can help control shock. Alternative Names 
 
 Shock - hypovolemic References 
 
 den Uil CA, Klijn E, Lagrand WK, et al. The microcirculation in health and critical disease.  Prog Cardiovasc Dis . 2008;51:161-170. The microcirculation in health and critical disease. PMID: 18774014  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18774014 .
  Groeneveld ABJ. Hypovolemic shock. In: Parrillo JE, Dellinger P, eds.  Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and Management in the Adult . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 26. Jones AE, Kline JA. Shock. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Rivers E. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 106. Tarrant AM, Ryan MF, Hamilton PA, Bejaminov O. A pictorial review of hypovolaemic shock in adults.  Br J Radiol . 2008;81:252-257. PMID: 18180262  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18180262 . 
  Read More 
 
 Bleeding 
 Cardiogenic shock 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 First Aid 
 Shock 
 Browse the Encyclopedia