
 Hypothalamic dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypothalamic dysfunction is a problem with part of the brain called the  hypothalamus . The hypothalamus helps control the pituitary gland and regulates many body functions. Causes 
 
 The hypothalamus helps control the pituitary gland. The pituitary is a small gland at the base of the brain. The pituitary, in turn, controls the: Adrenal glands Ovaries Testes Thyroid gland  The hypothalamus also helps regulate: Body temperature Childbirth Emotions Growth Production of breast milk Salt and water balance Sleep Weight and appetite  The most common causes of hypothalamic dysfunction are surgery, traumatic brain injury, tumors, and radiation. Other causes include: Anorexia nervosa  or  bulimia Bleeding Genetic disorders that cause iron buildup in the body Head trauma Infections and swelling (inflammation) Malnutrition Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are usually due to the hormones that are missing. In children, there may be growth problems, either too much or too little growth. In other children, puberty occurs too early or too late. Tumor symptoms may include headache or loss of vision. Hypothyroidism  symptoms may include feeling cold all the time, constipation,  fatigue , or  weight gain , among others.  Low adrenal function symptoms may include dizziness or weakness. Kallmann syndrome is a genetic type of hypothalamic dysfunction. Symptoms include: Lowered function of sexual hormones ( hypogonadism ) Inability to smell (in some people)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical examination and ask about your symptoms. Blood or urine tests may be ordered to determine levels of hormones such as: Cortisol Estrogen Growth hormone Pituitary hormones Prolactin Testosterone Thyroid  Other possible tests include: Hormone injections followed by timed blood samples  MRI  or  CT  scans of the brain Visual field eye exam  (if there is a tumor)  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the hypothalamic dysfunction: For tumors, surgery or radiation may be needed. For hormonal deficiencies, missing hormones need to be replaced by taking medicine.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many causes of hypothalamic dysfunction are treatable. Most of the time, missing hormones can be replaced. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of hypothalamic dysfunction depend on the cause. BRAIN TUMORS Permanent blindness Problems related to the brain area where the tumor occurs Vision disorders Problems controlling salt and water balance  HYPOTHYROIDISM Heart problems High cholesterol ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY Inability to deal with stress (such as surgery or infection), which can be life-threatening by causing low blood pressure  GONADAL DEFICIENCY Heart disease Erection problems Infertility Thin bones ( osteoporosis ) Problems breast feeding  GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY High cholesterol Osteoporosis Short stature  (in children) Weakness  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your doctor if you have: Headaches Symptoms of hormone excess or deficiency Vision problems  Prevention 
 
 If you believe you have an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia, get medical attention. These conditions can be life-threatening. If you have symptoms of a hormonal deficiency, discuss replacement therapy with your health care provider. Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Giustina A, Braunstein GD. Hypothalamic syndromes. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 10. Molitch ME. Neuroendocrinology and the neuroendocrine system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 223. Read More 
 
 Anorexia 
 Bulimia 
 Hypothalamus 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia