
 Hypotonia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypotonia means decreased muscle tone. Considerations 
 
 Hypotonia is often a sign of a worrisome problem. The condition can affect children or adults. Infants with this problem seem floppy and feel like a "rag doll" when held. They rest with their elbows and knees loosely extended. Infants with normal tone tend to have flexed elbows and knees. They may have poor head control. The head may fall to the side, backward, or forward. Infants with normal tone can be lifted with the adult's hands placed under the armpits. Hypotonic infants tend to slip between the hands. Causes 
 
 Muscle tone and movement involve the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and muscles. Hypotonia may be a sign of a problem anywhere along the pathway that controls muscle movement. Causes may include: Brain damage, due to lack of oxygen before or right after birth, or problems with brain formation Disorders of the muscles, such as  muscular dystrophy Disorders that affect the nerves that supply muscles Disorders that affect the ability of nerves to send messages to the muscles Infections  Genetic or chromosomal disorders, or defects that may cause brain and nerve damage include: Down syndrome Spinal muscular atrophy Prader-Willi syndrome Tay-Sachs disease Trisomy 13 Other disorders that can lead to the condition include: Achondroplasia Being born with hypothyroidism Marfan syndrome Poisons or toxins Spinal cord injuries that occur around the time of birth  Home Care 
 
 Take extra care when lifting and carrying a person with hypotonia to avoid causing an injury. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The physical exam will include a detailed examination of the nervous system and muscle function. In most cases, a neurologist (specialist in brain and nerves) will help evaluate the problem. Geneticists may help diagnose certain disorders. If there are also other medical problems, a number of different specialists will help care for the child. Which diagnostic tests are done depends on the suspected cause of the hypotonia. Most of the conditions associated with hypotonia also cause other symptoms that can help in the diagnosis. Many of these disorders require ongoing care and support. Alternative Names 
 
 Decreased muscle tone; Floppy infant Images 
 
 
 Hypotonia 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Burnette WB. The hypotonic (floppy) infant). In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 29. Johnston MV. Encephalopathies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 598. Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Weakness and hypotonia. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM.  Nelson's Essesntials of Pediatrics . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 7. Sarnat HB. Evaluation and investigation. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 607. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia