
 Hypopituitarism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypopituitarism is a condition in which the pituitary gland does not produce normal amounts of some or all of its hormones. Causes 
 
 The pituitary gland is a small structure that is located just below the brain. It is attached by a stalk to the  hypothalamus . The hypothalamus is the area of the brain that controls the pituitary gland's function. The hormones released by the pituitary gland (and their functions) are: Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) -- stimulates the adrenal gland to release cortisol; cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure and blood sugar Antidiuretic hormone  (ADH) -- controls water loss by the kidneys Follicle-stimulating hormone  (FSH) -- controls sexual function and fertility in males and females Growth hormone  (GH) -- stimulates growth of tissues and bone Luteinizing hormone  (LH) -- controls sexual function and fertility in males and females Oxytocin -- stimulates the uterus to contract during labor and the breasts to release milk Prolactin  -- stimulates female breast development and milk production Thyroid-stimulating hormone  (TSH) -- stimulates the thyroid gland to release hormones that affect the body's  metabolism Watch this video about: Pituitary gland In hypopituitarism, there is a lack of 1 or more pituitary hormones. Lack of a hormone leads to loss of function in the gland or organ the hormone controls. For example, lack of TSH leads to loss of normal function of the thyroid gland. Hypopituitarism may be caused by: Brain surgery Brain tumor Head trauma (traumatic brain injury) Infections or inflammation of the brain and the tissues that support the brain Death of an area of tissue in the pituitary gland ( pituitary apoplexy ) Radiation therapy to the brain Stroke Subarachnoid hemorrhage  (from a burst aneurysm) Tumors of the pituitary gland or hypothalamus  Sometimes, hypopituitarism is due to uncommon immune system or metabolic diseases, such as: 
   Too much iron in the body ( hemochromatosis ) 
   Abnormal increase in immune cells called histiocytes ( histiocytosis X ) Autoimmune condition  that causes inflammation of the pituitary (lymphocytic hypophysitis) 
   Inflammation of various tissues and organs ( sarcoidosis ) Hypopituitarism is also a rare complication after pregnancy of a condition called  Sheehan syndrome .
 Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of hypopituitarism include any of the following: Abdominal pain Decreased appetite Lack of sex drive (in men or women) Dizziness or fainting Excessive urination and thirst Failure to release milk (in women) Fatigue , weakness Headache Infertility  (in women) or stopping of menstrual periods Loss of armpit or pubic hair Loss of body or facial hair (in men) Low blood pressure Low blood sugar Sensitivity to cold Short height  (less than 5 feet or 1.5 meters) if onset is during a growth period Slowed growth and sexual development (in children) Vision problems Weight loss Symptoms may develop slowly and may vary greatly, depending upon: The number of hormones that are missing and the organs they affect The severity of the disorder  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Face swelling Hair loss Hoarseness or changing voice Joint stiffness Weight gain (unintentional) Exams and Tests 
 
 To diagnose hypopituitarism, there must be low hormone levels due to a problem with the pituitary gland. The diagnosis must also rule out diseases of the organ that is affected by this hormone. Tests may include: Brain CT scan Pituitary MRI Serum ACTH Serum cortisol Serum estradiol  (estrogen) Serum follicle-stimulating hormone  (FSH) Serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) Serum luteinizing hormone  (LH) Serum testosterone  level Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone  (TSH) Thyroid hormone ( T4 )  Levels of a pituitary hormone may be high in the bloodstream if you have a pituitary tumor that is producing too much of that hormone. The tumor may crush other cells of the pituitary, leading to low levels of other hormones. Treatment 
 
 If hypopituitarism is caused by a tumor, you may need surgery to remove the tumor. Radiation therapy may also be needed. You will need lifelong hormone medicines to replace hormones that are no longer made by organs under the control of the pituitary gland. These may include: Corticosteroids (cortisol) Growth hormone Sex hormones ( testosterone  for men and estrogen for women) Thyroid hormone Drugs are also available to treat related  infertility  in men and women. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Hypopituitarism is usually permanent. It requires lifelong treatment with 1 or more medicines. But you can expect a normal life span. Possible Complications 
 
 Side effects of medicines can develop. Stopping corticosteroid and thyroid supplementation can be life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of hypopituitarism. Prevention 
 
 In most cases, the disorder is not preventable. Awareness of risk may allow early diagnosis and treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Pituitary insufficiency Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pituitary gland 
 Pituitary hormones 
 Pituitary and TSH 
 References 
 
 Burt MG, Ho KKY. Hypopituitarism and growth hormone deficiency. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 11. Clemmons DR, Nieman LK. Approach to the patient with endocrine disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 221. Read More 
 
 Antidiuretic hormone blood test 
 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) blood test 
 Growth hormone test 
 Hypothalamus 
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test 
 Metabolism 
 Prolactin blood test 
 TSH test 
 
 Review Date 10/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pituitary Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia