
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hypoparathyroidism is a disorder in which the parathyroid glands in the neck do not produce enough parathyroid hormone (PTH). Causes 
 
 There are 4 tiny parathyroid glands in the neck, located near or attached to the back side of the thyroid gland. The parathyroid glands help control calcium use and removal by the body. They do this by producing parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH helps control calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels in the blood and bone. Hypoparathyroidism occurs when the glands produce too little PTH. The blood calcium level falls, and the phosphorus level rises. The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is injury to the parathyroid glands during thyroid or neck surgery. It may also be caused by any of the following: Radioactive iodine treatment for hyperthyroidism Very low magnesium level in the blood Autoimmune  attack on the parathyroid glands  DiGeorge syndrome is a childhood disease in which hypoparathyroidism occurs because all the parathyroid glands are missing at birth. This disease includes other health problems besides hypoparathyroidism. 
  Familial hypoparathyroidism occurs with other endocrine diseases such as adrenal insufficiency in a syndrome called type I polyglandular autoimmune syndrome (PGA I). Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Abdominal pain Brittle nails Cataracts Calcium deposits in some tissues
  Decreased consciousness Dry hair Dry, scaly skin Muscle cramps Muscle spasms called tetany (can affect the larynx, causing breathing difficulties) Pain in the face , legs, and feet Painful menstruation Seizures Teeth that do not grow in on time, or at all Tingling  lips, fingers, and toes Weakened tooth enamel (in children)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about symptoms. Tests that will be done include: PTH blood test Calcium blood test Magnesium 24-hour urine test Other tests that may be ordered include: ECG  to check for an abnormal heart rhythm CT scan to check for calcium deposits in the brain Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms and restore the calcium and mineral balance in the body. Treatment involves calcium carbonate and  vitamin D  supplements. These usually must be taken for life. Blood levels are measured regularly to make sure that the dose is correct. A high-calcium, low-phosphorous diet is recommended. Injections of PTH may be recommended for some people. Your doctor can tell you if this medicine is right for you. 
  People who have life-threatening attacks of low calcium levels or prolonged muscle contractions are given calcium through a vein (IV). Precautions are taken to prevent seizures or larynx spasms. The heart is monitored for abnormal rhythms until the person is stable. When the life-threatening attack has been controlled, treatment continues with medicine taken by mouth. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is likely to be good if the diagnosis is made early. But changes in the teeth, cataracts, and brain  calcifications  cannot be reversed in children who have undiagnosed hypoparathyroidism during development. Possible Complications 
 
 Hypoparathyroidism in children may lead to poor growth, abnormal teeth, and slow mental development. Too much treatment with vitamin D and calcium can cause high blood calcium ( hypercalcemia ) or high urine calcium (hypercalciuria). Excess treatment may sometimes interfere with kidney function, or even cause kidney failure. Hypoparathyroidism increases the risk of:  Addison disease (only if the cause is autoimmune) Cataracts Parkinson disease Pernicious anemia  (only if the cause is autoimmune)
  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop any symptoms of hypoparathyroidism. Seizures or breathing problems are an emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Parathyroid-related hypocalcemia Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Parathyroid glands 
 References 
 
 Clarke BL, Brown EM, Collins MT, et al. Epidemiology and diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab.  2016;101(6):2284-2299. PMID: 26943720  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26943720 . Darr EA, Sritharan N, Pellitteri PK, Sofferman RA, Randolph GW. Management of parathyroid disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 124. Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 245. Read More 
 
 Addison disease 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hypercalcemia 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) blood test 
 Parkinson disease 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Tracheostomy 
 
 Review Date 5/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parathyroid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia