
 Hypothalamic tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A hypothalamic  tumor  is an abnormal growth in the  hypothalamus  gland, which is located in the brain. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of hypothalamic tumors is not known. It is likely that they result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. In children, most hypothalamic tumors are gliomas. Gliomas are a common type of brain tumor that results from the abnormal growth of glial cells, which support nerve cells. Gliomas can occur at any age. They are often more aggressive in adults than in children. In adults, tumors in the hypothalamus are more likely cancer that has spread from another organ. People with  neurofibromatosis  (a hereditary condition) are at increased risk for this type of tumor. People who have undergone radiation therapy are at increased risk for developing tumors in general. Symptoms 
 
 These tumors can cause a range of symptoms: Euphoric "high" sensations Failure to thrive  (lack of normal growth in children) Headache Hyperactivity Loss of body fat and appetite (cachexia)  These symptoms are most often seen in children whose tumors affect the front part of the hypothalamus. Some tumors may cause vision loss. If the tumors block the flow of spinal fluid, headaches and sleepiness may result from fluid collecting in the brain ( hydrocephalus ). Some people can have seizures as a result of brain tumors. Other people may develop  precocious puberty  from a change in pituitary gland function. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may see signs of a hypothalamic tumor during a regular checkup. He or she will perform a brain and nervous system (neurological) exam, including tests of  visual function . Blood tests for hormone imbalances may also be done. Depending on the results of the examination and blood tests, a  CT scan  or  MRI scan  can determine whether you have a hypothalamic tumor. Visual field testing  may be done to check for vision loss, and to determine whether the condition is improving or getting worse. Treatment 
 
 The treatment depends on how aggressive the tumor is, and whether it is a glioma or another type of cancer. Treatment may involve combinations of surgery,  radiation , and  chemotherapy . Special radiation treatments can be focused on the tumor. They can be as effective as surgery, with less risk to surrounding tissue. Brain swelling caused by a tumor may need to be treated with steroids. Hypothalamic tumors may produce hormones or affect hormone production, leading to imbalances that may need to be corrected. In some cases, hormones may need to be replaced or reduced. Support Groups 
 
 You can often help the stress of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on: The type of tumor (glioma or other type) Location of tumor Grade of tumor Size of tumor Your age and general health  In general, gliomas in adults are more aggressive than in children and usually have a worse outcome. Tumors that cause hydrocephalus may cause more complications, and may need surgery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of brain surgery may include: Bleeding Brain damage Death (rarely) Infection  Seizures can result from the tumor or from any surgical procedure on the brain. Hydrocephalus can occur with some tumors and can require surgery or a catheter placed in the brain to reduce spinal fluid pressure. Risks of radiation therapy include damage to healthy brain cells when tumor cells are destroyed. Common side effects from chemotherapy include loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, and fatigue. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child develops any symptoms of a hypothalamic tumor. Regular medical check-ups may detect early signs of a problem, such as abnormal weight gain or early puberty. Alternative Names 
 
 Hypothalamic glioma; Hypothalamus - tumor References 
 
 Molitch ME. Neuroendocrinology and the neuroendocrine system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 223. Ntali G, Karavitaki N. Childhood hypothalamic and pituitary tumors. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 17. Read More 
 
 Hypothalamus 
 Neurofibromatosis-1 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Tumors 
 Browse the Encyclopedia