
 Ibuprofen overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ibuprofen is a type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Ibuprofen overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medication. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Ibuprofen is sold over-the-counter and by prescription. Where Found 
 
 Ibuprofen is found in: Advil  Medipren Midol Motrin Nuprin Pamprin IB PediaProfen Rufen  Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may develop in the following areas: Eyes, ears, nose, throat, and mouth Ringing in the ears Blurred vision Gastrointestinal Diarrhea Heartburn Nausea Stomach pain  (possible bleeding in stomach and intestines) Vomiting, sometimes bloody  Kidneys Little to no urine production  Lungs Breathing - difficult Breathing - slow Wheezing  Nervous system Headache Agitation Incoherence (not understandable) Confusion Coma Drowsiness Seizures Dizziness Unsteadiness Skin Rash Sweating Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray Tube through the mouth into the stomach and small intestine to identify and treat internal bleeding (endoscopy) EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is likely with prompt medical treatment. Some people may have chronic liver or kidney injury. Alternative Names 
 
 Advil overdose; Nuprin overdose; PediaProfen overdose; Rufen overdose; Motrin overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Seger DL, Murray L. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 149. 
 Review Date 1/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia