
 Incontinentia pigmenti  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Incontinentia pigmenti is a skin condition passed down through families. It leads to unusual blistering and changes in skin color. Causes 
 
 Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is caused by an  x-linked dominant  genetic defect. The condition is most often seen in females. When it occurs in males, it is lethal. Symptoms 
 
 Infants with IP are born with streaky,  blistering  areas. When the areas heal, they turn into rough bumps. Eventually, these bumps go away, but leave behind darkened skin, called  hyperpigmentation . After several years, the skin returns to normal. In some adults, there may be areas of lighter colored skin ( hypopigmentation ). IP is associated with  central nervous system  problems, including: Delayed development Loss of movement (paralysis) Intellectual disability Muscle spasms Seizures People with IP may also have abnormal teeth,  hair loss , and  vision problems . Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam, look at the eyes, and test muscle movement.  There may be unusual patterns and blisters on the skin, as well as bone abnormalities. An eye exam may reveal  cataracts ,  strabismus  (crossed eyes), or other problems. To confirm diagnosis, these tests may be done: Blood tests Skin biopsy CT  or  MRI  scan of the brain Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for IP. Treatment is aimed at the individual symptoms. For example, glasses may be needed to improve vision. Medicine may be prescribed to help control seizures or muscle spasms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the severity of central nervous system involvement and eye problems. When to Call a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have a family history of IP and are considering having children Your child has symptoms of this disorder  Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be helpful for those with a family history of IP who are considering having children. Alternative Names 
 
 Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome Images 
 
 
 Incontinentia pigmenti on the leg 
 Incontinentia pigmenti on the leg 
 References 
 
 Islam MP, Roach ES. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 65. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Genodermatoses and congenital anomalies. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 27. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Genetics 
 Hair loss 
 Intellectual disability 
 Muscle cramps 
 Muscle function loss 
 Secondary infections 
 Seizures 
 Vision problems 
 Walking abnormalities 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia