
 Indium-labelled WBC scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Radioactive abscess scan looks for abscesses in the body using a radioactive material. An  abscess  occurs when pus collects due to an infection.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 Blood is drawn from a vein, most often on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.  The site is cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). The health care provider wraps an elastic band around the upper arm to apply pressure to the area and make the vein swell with blood. Next, the provider gently inserts a needle into the vein. The blood collects into an airtight vial or tube attached to the needle. The elastic band is removed from your arm. The puncture site is covered to stop any bleeding.  The blood sample is then sent to a lab. There the white blood cells are tagged with a radioactive substance called indium. The cells are then injected back into a vein through another needle stick.  You will need to return to the office 6 to 24 hours later. At that time, you will have a nuclear medicine scan to see if white blood cells have gathered in areas of your body where they would not be normally located. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Most of the time you do not need special preparation. You will need to sign a consent form. For the test, you will need to wear a hospital gown or loose clothing. You will need to take off all jewelry. Tell your provider if you are pregnant. This procedure is NOT recommended if you are pregnant or trying to become pregnant. Women of childbearing age (before menopause) should use some form of birth control during the course of this procedure. Tell your provider if you have or had any of the following medical conditions, procedures, or treatments, as they can interfere with test results: Gallium (Ga) scan  within the past month Hemodialysis Hyperglycemia Long-term antibiotic therapy Steroid therapy Total parenteral nutrition (through an IV)  How the Test will Feel 
 
 Some people feel a little pain when the needle is inserted to draw blood. Others feel only a prick or sting. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. The nuclear medicine scan is painless. It may be a little uncomfortable to lie flat and still on the scanning table. This most often takes about an hour. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test may be done to look for an infection, often for a bone infection called osteomyelitis. It is also used to look for an abscess that may form after surgery or on its own.  Other times it can be used to look for an abscess. Symptoms of an abscess depend on where it is found, but may include: Fever that has lasted a few weeks without an explanation Not feeling well (malaise) Pain  Often, other imaging tests such as an  ultrasound  or  CT scan  may be done first.  Normal Results 
 
 Normal findings would show no abnormal gathering of white blood cells. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A gathering of white blood cells outside of the normal areas is a sign of either an abscess or other type of inflammatory process. Some types of abscess are: Abdominal abscess Amebic liver abscess Anorectal abscess Bartholin abscess Epidural abscess Peritonsillar abscess Pyogenic liver abscess Skin abscess Spinal cord abscess Subcutaneous abscess Tooth abscess Risks 
 
 The risks of this test include: Some bruising may occur at the site of injection. There is always a slight chance of infection when the skin is broken. There is low-level radiation exposure.  The test is controlled so that you get only the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is very low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of radiation. Alternative Names 
 
 Radioactive abscess scan; Abscess scan; Indium scan; Indium-labelled white blood cell scan References 
 
 Hutton BF, Segerman D, Miles KA. Radionuclide and hybrid imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 6. Matteson EL, Osmon DR. Infections of bursae, joints, and bones. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 272. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Browse the Encyclopedia