
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Injury to the kidney and ureter is damage to the organs of the upper urinary tract. Causes 
 
 The kidneys are located in the flank at either side of the spine. The flank is the back of the upper abdomen. They are protected by the spine, lower rib cage, and strong muscles of the back. This location protects the kidneys from many outside forces. The kidneys are also surrounded by a layer of fat. The fat helps to cushion them. The kidneys have a large blood supply. Any injury to them, can lead to severe bleeding. The many layers of padding help prevent kidney injury. Kidneys may be injured by damage to the blood vessels that supply or drain them, including: Aneurysm Arterial blockage Arteriovenous  fistula Renal vein thrombosis  (clotting) Trauma  Kidney injuries may also be caused by: Angiomyolipoma, a noncancerous tumor Autoimmune disorders Bladder outlet obstruction Cancer of the kidney, pelvic organs (ovaries or uterus in women), or colon Diabetes Buildup of body waste products such as uric acid (which can occur with  gout  or treatment of bone marrow, lymph node, or other disorders) Exposure to toxic substances such as lead, cleaning products, solvents, fuels, or long-term use of high-dose pain medicines ( analgesic nephropathy ) High blood pressure and other medical conditions that affect the kidneys Inflammation caused by immune responses to medicines, infection, or other disorders Medical procedures such as  kidney biopsy , or nephrostomy tube placement Ureteropelvic junction obstruction Ureteral obstruction  Kidney stones The ureters are the tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder. Ureteral injuries may be caused by: Complications from medical procedures Diseases such as  retroperitoneal fibrosis , retroperitoneal sarcomas, or cancers that spread to the lymph nodes near the ureters Kidney stone disease Radiation  to the belly area Trauma  Symptoms 
 
 Emergency symptoms may include: Abdominal pain  and swelling Severe flank pain and back pain Blood in the urine Drowsiness,  decreased alertness , including coma Decreased urine output or inability to urinate Fever Increased heart rate Nausea, vomiting Skin that is pale or cool to touch Sweating Long-term (chronic) symptoms may include: Malnutrition  High blood pressure If only one kidney is affected and the other kidney is healthy, you may not have any symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. Let them know about any recent illness or if you have come into contact with toxic substances. The exam may show: Excess bleeding (hemorrhage) Extreme tenderness over the kidney Shock , including rapid heart rate or falling blood pressure Signs of kidney failure  Tests that may be done include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal MRI Abdominal ultrasound Angiography  of the kidney artery or vein Blood  electrolytes Blood tests to look for toxic substances Complete blood count ( CBC ) Intravenous pyelogram ( IVP ) Kidney function tests Retrograde pyelogram Kidney x-ray Renal scan Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 The goals are to treat emergency symptoms and prevent or treat complications. You may need to stay in a hospital. Treatments for a kidney injury may include: Bed rest for 1 to 2 weeks or until bleeding is reduced Close observation and treatment for symptoms of kidney failure Diet changes Medicines to treat damage caused by toxic substances or illnesses (for example, chelation therapy for lead poisoning or allopurinol to lower uric acid in the blood due to gout) Pain medicines Eliminating medicines or exposure to substances that may have injured the kidney Drugs such as corticosteroids or immunosuppressants if the injury was caused by inflammation Treatment of acute kidney failure Sometimes, surgery is needed. This may include: Repairing a "fractured" or torn kidney, torn blood vessels, torn ureter, or similar injury Removing the entire kidney ( nephrectomy ), draining the space around the kidney, or stopping the bleeding via arterial catheterization (angioembolization) Placing a stent Removing blockage or relieving obstruction Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the cause and severity of the injury.  Sometimes, the kidney starts working properly again. Sometimes, kidney failure occurs.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Sudden kidney failure , one or both kidneys Bleeding (may be minor or severe) Bruising of the kidney Chronic kidney failure , one or both kidneys Infection ( peritonitis ,  sepsis ) Pain Renal artery stenosis Renal hypertension Shock Urinary tract infection When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of an injury to the kidney or ureter. Call the provider if you have a history of: Exposure to toxic substances Illness Infection Physical injury Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have decreased urine output after a kidney injury. This may be a symptom of kidney failure. Prevention 
 
 You can help prevent injury to the kidneys and ureter by taking these steps: Be aware of substances that can cause lead poisoning. These include old paints, vapors from working with lead-coated metals, and alcohol distilled in recycled car radiators. Take all your medicines properly, including ones you buy without a prescription (over-the-counter). Treating gout and other illnesses as instructed by your provider. Use safety equipment during work and play. Use cleaning products, solvents, and fuels as directed. Make sure the area is well-ventilated, because the fumes may also be toxic. Wear seat belts and drive safely. Alternative Names 
 
 Kidney damage; Toxic injury of the kidney; Kidney injury; Traumatic injury of the kidney; Fractured kidney; Inflammatory injury of the kidney; Bruised kidney; Ureteral injury; Pre-renal failure - injury, Post-renal failure - injury; Kidney obstruction - injury
 Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 Molitoris BA. Acute kidney injury. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 120. Santucci RA, Chen ML. Upper urinary tract trauma. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 50. Sharfuddin AA, Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM, Molitoris BA. Acute kidney injury. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Arterial embolism 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Gout 
 Peritonitis 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Renovascular hypertension 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 10/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Ureteral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia