
 Intraductal papilloma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Intraductal papilloma is a small, noncancerous (benign)  tumor  that grows in a milk duct of the breast. Causes 
 
 Intraductal papilloma occurs most often in women ages 35 to 55. The causes and risk factors are unknown. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Breast lump Nipple discharge, which may be clear or bloodstained These findings may be in just 1 breast or in both breasts. For the most part, these papillomas do not cause pain. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider might feel a small lump under the nipple, but this lump cannot always be felt. There may be discharge from the nipple. A mammogram should be performed, but may not show a papilloma. Ultrasound may be helpful. Other tests include: A breast biopsy to rule out  cancer . If you have nipple discharge, a surgical biopsy is performed. If you have a lump, sometimes a needle biopsy can be done to make a diagnosis. An examination of discharge released from the breast to see if the cells are abnormal (atypical) or indicate cancer. An x-ray with contrast dye injected into the affected duct (ductogram). This test has been mostly replaced by ultrasound.  Treatment 
 
 The duct is removed with surgery. The cells are checked for cancer ( biopsy ). Support Groups 
 
 There may be support groups for women with breast disease in your area. Ask your provider for a recommendation. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 For the most part, intraductal papillomas do not appear to increase the risk for developing breast cancer. The outcome is excellent for people with 1 papilloma. The risk for cancer may be higher for: Women with many papillomas  Women who get them at an early age  Women with a family history of cancer Women who have abnormal cells in the biopsy Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of surgery can include bleeding, infection, and anesthesia risks. If the biopsy shows cancer, you may need further surgery. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice any breast discharge or a breast lump. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent intraductal papilloma.  Breast self-exams  and screening  mammograms  can help detect the disease early. Images 
 
 
 Needle biopsy of the breast 
 Intraductal papilloma 
 Abnormal discharge from the nipple 
 References 
 
 Davidson NE. Breast cancer and benign breast disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 198. Hunt KK, Green MC, Buccholz TA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia