
 Iodine in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Iodine is a trace mineral and a nutrient found naturally in the body. Function 
 
 Iodine is needed for the cells to convert food into energy. Humans need iodine for normal thyroid function, and for the production of thyroid hormones. Food Sources 
 
 Iodized salt is table salt with iodine added. It is the main food source of iodine.  Seafood is naturally rich in iodine. Cod, sea bass, haddock, and perch are good sources.  Kelp is the most common vegetable-seafood that is a rich source of iodine.  Dairy products also contain iodine.  Other good sources are plants grown in iodine-rich soil. Side Effects 
 
 Lack of enough iodine (deficiency) may occur in places that have iodine-poor soil. Many months of iodine deficiency in a person's diet may cause  goiter  or  hypothyroidism . Without enough iodine, the thyroid cells and the thyroid gland become enlarged. Deficiency happens more often in women than in men. It is also more common in pregnant women and older children. Getting enough iodine in the diet may prevent a form of physical and intellectual disability called cretinism. Cretinism is very rare in the United States because iodine deficiency is generally not a problem. Iodine poisoning is rare in the United States. Very high intake of iodine can reduce the function of the thyroid gland. Recommendations 
 
 The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods from the food guide plate. A 1/4 teaspoon (1.5 grams) of iodized table salt provides 95 micrograms of iodine. A 6-ounce (170 grams) portion of ocean fish provides 650 micrograms of iodine. Most people are able to meet the daily recommendations by eating seafood, iodized salt, and plants grown in iodine-rich soil. When buying salt make sure it is labeled "iodized." The Food and Nutrition Board at the Institute of Medicine recommends the following dietary intake for iodine: Infants 0 to 6 months: 110 micrograms per day (mcg/day)* 7 to 12 months: 130 mcg/day*  *AI or Adequate Intake Children 1 to 3 years: 90 mcg/day 4 to 8 years: 90 mcg/day 9 to 13 years: 120 mcg/day  Adolescents and Adults Males age 14 and older: 150 mcg/day Females age 14 and older: 150 mcg/day Pregnant females of all ages: 220 mcg/day Lactating females of all ages: 290 mcg/day  Specific recommendations depend on age, gender, and other factors (such as pregnancy). Women who are pregnant or producing breast milk (lactating) need higher amounts. Ask your health care provider which amount is best for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - iodine References 
 
 Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron Manganese, Molybdenium, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc.  National Academy Press . Washington, DC, 2001. PMID: 25057538  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057538 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Read More 
 
 Metabolism 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Minerals 
 Browse the Encyclopedia