
 Joint fluid Gram stain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Joint fluid Gram stain is a laboratory test to identify bacteria in a sample of joint fluid using a special series of stains (colors). The Gram stain method is one of the most commonly used methods to rapidly diagnose bacterial infections. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  sample of joint fluid  is needed.  The fluid sample is sent to a lab where a small drop is placed in a very thin layer onto a microscope slide. This is called a smear. Several different colored stains are applied to the sample. The laboratory personnel will look at the stained smear under a microscope to see if bacteria are present. The color, size, and shape of the cells help identify the bacteria. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 For information on how to prepare for the removal of joint fluid, see  joint fluid aspiration . How the Test will Feel 
 
 For information on how it will feel when the joint fluid is removed, see  joint fluid aspiration . Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is performed when there is unexplained swelling,  joint pain , and inflammation of a joint, or to check for suspected joint infection. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means no bacteria are present on the Gram stain. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results mean bacteria were seen on the Gram stain. This may be a sign of a joint infection, for example,  gonococcal arthritis  or arthritis due to  Staphylococcus aureus. Risks 
 
 There is no risk to the person associated with a Gram stain. For information regarding risks related to the removal of joint fluid, see  joint fluid aspiration . Alternative Names 
 
 Gram stain of joint fluid References 
 
 Matteson EL, Osmon DR. Infections of bursae, joints, and bones. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 280. Ohl CA, Forster D. Infectious arthritis of native joints. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglass, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 105. Read More 
 
 Gonococcal arthritis 
 Joint pain 
 
 Review Date 11/24/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Levy, MD, PhD, Infectious Diseases, Lutherville Personal Physicians, Lutherville, MD. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia