
 Juvenile angiofibroma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Juvenile angiofibroma is a noncancerous growth that causes bleeding in the nose and sinuses. It is most often seen in boys and young adult men. Causes 
 
 Juvenile angiofibroma is not very common. It is most often found in adolescent boys. The  tumor  contains many blood vessels, spreads within the area in which it started (locally  invasive ), and can cause bone damage. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Difficulty breathing  through the nose Easy bruising Frequent or repeated nosebleeds Hearing loss Nasal discharge , usually bloody Prolonged  bleeding Stuffy nose Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may see the angiofibroma when examining the upper throat. Tests that may be done include: Arteriogram  to see the blood supply to the growth CT scan of the head MRI scan of the head X-ray Biopsy is generally not recommended due to the high risk of bleeding. Treatment 
 
 You will need treatment if the angiofibroma is growing larger, blocking the airways, or causing repeated nosebleeds. In some cases, no treatment is needed. Surgery may be needed to remove the tumor. The tumor may be hard to remove if it is not enclosed and has spread to other areas. Newer surgery techniques that place a camera up through the nose have made tumor removal surgery less invasive. A procedure called embolization may be done to prevent the tumor from bleeding. The procedure may correct the nosebleeds by itself, but it is most often followed by surgery to remove the tumor. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Although not cancerous, angiofibromas may continue to grow. Some may disappear on their own.  It is common for the tumor to return after surgery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Anemia Pressure on the brain (rare) Spread of the tumor to the nose, sinuses, and other structures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you often have nosebleeds. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Nasal tumor; Angiofibroma - juvenile; Benign nasal tumor; Juvenile nasal angiofibroma; JNA Images 
 
 
 Nasal mucosa 
 References 
 
 Haddad J, Keesecker S. Acquired disorders of the nose. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 377. Nicolai P, Castelnuovo P. Benign tumors of the sinonasal tract. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 48. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Invasive 
 Stuffy or runny nose - adult 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia