
 Kaposi sarcoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Kaposi sarcoma is a cancerous  tumor  of the connective tissue, and is often associated with  AIDS . Causes 
 
 Before the AIDS epidemic, Kaposi sarcoma was seen mainly in elderly Italian and Jewish men, and rarely, in elderly women. Among this group, the tumors developed slowly. In AIDS patients, the cancer can develop quickly. It may also involve the: Gastrointestinal tract Lungs Skin Other organs In people with AIDS, Kaposi sarcoma is caused by an interaction between HIV, a weakened immune system, and the human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8). Kaposi sarcoma has been linked to the spread of HIV and HHV-8 through sexual activity. People who have kidney or other organ transplants are also at risk for Kaposi sarcoma. African Kaposi sarcoma is fairly common in young adult males living near the equator. One form is also common in young African children. Symptoms 
 
 The tumors (lesions) most often appear as bluish-red or purple bumps on the skin. They are reddish-purple because they are rich in blood vessels. The lesions may first appear on any part of the body. They also can appear inside the body. Lesions inside the body may bleed. Lesions in the lungs can cause  bloody sputum  or  shortness of breath . Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be performed to diagnose Kaposi sarcoma: Bronchoscopy CT scan Endoscopy Skin biopsy Treatment 
 
 How this condition is treated depends on: How much the immune system is suppressed ( immunosuppression ) Number and location of the tumors Symptoms  Treatments include: Antiviral therapy against HIV, since there is no specific therapy for HHV-8 Combination  chemotherapy Freezing the lesions Radiation therapy Lesions may return after treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treating Kaposi sarcoma does not improve the chances of survival from AIDS itself. The outlook depends on the person's immune status and how much of the HIV virus is in their blood (viral load). Possible Complications 
 
 Complications can include: Cough (possibly bloody) and shortness of breath if the disease is in the lungs Leg swelling that may be painful or cause infections if the disease is in the lymph nodes of the legs  The tumors can return even after treatment. Kaposi sarcoma can be deadly for a person with AIDS. An aggressive form of African Kaposi sarcoma can spread quickly to the bones. Another form found in African children does not affect the skin. Instead, it spreads through the lymph nodes and vital organs, and can quickly become deadly. Prevention 
 
 Safe sexual practices can prevent HIV infection. This prevents AIDS and its complications, including Kaposi sarcoma. Alternative Names 
 
 Kaposi's sarcoma Images 
 
 
 Kaposi's sarcoma - lesion on the foot 
 Kaposi's sarcoma on the back 
 Kaposi's sarcoma - close-up 
 Kaposi's sarcoma on the thigh 
 Kaposi's sarcoma - perianal 
 Kaposi's sarcoma on foot 
 References 
 
 Kaye KM. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus type 8). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 143. Volberding PA. Hematology and oncology in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 400. Read More 
 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kaposi's Sarcoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia