
 Keratosis pilaris 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Keratosis pilaris is a common skin condition in which a protein in the skin called keratin forms hard plugs within hair follicles. Causes 
 
 Keratosis pilaris is harmless ( benign ). It seems to run in families. It is more common in people who have very dry skin, or who have  atopic dermatitis  (eczema). The condition is generally worse in winter and often clears in the summer. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Small bumps that look like "goose bumps" on the back of the upper arms and thighs Bumps feel like very rough sandpaper Skin-colored bumps are the size of a grain of sand Slight pinkness may be seen around some bumps Bumps may appear on the face and be mistaken for acne  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can usually diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Tests are usually not needed.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include:  Moisturizing lotions to soothe the skin and help it look better Skin creams that contain urea, lactic acid, glycolic acid, salicylic acid, tretinoin, or vitamin D Steroid creams to reduce redness  Improvement often takes months and the bumps are likely to come back. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Keratosis pilaris may fade slowly with age. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if the bumps are bothersome and do not get better with lotions you buy without a prescription.  Images 
 
 
 Keratosis pilaris on the cheek 
 Keratosis pilaris rubra faceii 
 Keratosis pilaris rubra faceii 
 References 
 
 Desai NC, Silverman RA. Keratosis pilaris and variants. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 118. Marks JG, Miller JJ. Inflammatory papules. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 11. Read More 
 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 Benign 
 Papule 
 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eczema 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia