
 Kidney transplant 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A kidney transplant is surgery to place a healthy kidney into a person with  kidney failure . Description 
 
 Kidney transplants are one of the most common transplant operations in the United States. One donated kidney is needed to replace the work previously done by your kidneys. The donated kidney may be from: Living related donor -- related to the person receiving the transplant, such as a parent, sibling, or child Living unrelated donor -- such as a friend or spouse Deceased donor -- a person who has recently died and who has no known chronic kidney disease  The healthy kidney is transported in cool salt water (saline) that preserves the organ for up to 48 hours. This gives the health care providers time to perform tests to ensure that the donor's and recipient's blood and tissue match.  PROCEDURE FOR A LIVING KIDNEY DONOR If you are donating a kidney, you will be placed under general anesthesia before surgery. This means you will be asleep and pain-free. Surgeons today can often use small surgical cuts with laparoscopic techniques to remove the kidney. PROCEDURE FOR THE PERSON RECEIVING THE KIDNEY (RECIPIENT) People receiving a kidney transplant are given general anesthesia before surgery.  The surgeon makes a cut in the lower belly area. Your surgeon places the new kidney inside your lower belly. The artery and vein of the new kidney are connected to the artery and vein in your pelvis. Your blood flows through the new kidney, which makes urine just like your own kidneys did when they were healthy. The tube that carries urine (ureter) is then attached to your bladder. Your own kidneys are left in place unless they are causing a medical problem. The wound is then closed.  Kidney transplant surgery takes about 3 hours. People with diabetes may also have a pancreas transplant done at the same time. This can add another 3 hours to the surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 You may need a kidney transplant if you have end-stage kidney disease. The most common cause of end-stage kidney disease in the U.S. is diabetes. However, there are many other causes. A kidney transplant may NOT be done if you have: Certain infections, such as TB or bone infections Problems taking medications several times each day for the rest of your life Heart, lung, or liver disease Other life-threatening diseases Recent history of cancer Infections, such as hepatitis Current behaviors such as smoking, alcohol or drug abuse, or other risky lifestyle habits  Risks 
 
 Specific risks related to this procedure include: Blood clots (deep venous thrombosis) Heart attack or stroke Wound infections Side effects from medicines used to prevent transplant rejection Loss of transplanted kidney Before the Procedure 
 
 
You will be evaluated by a team at the transplant center. They will want to make sure that you are a good candidate for a kidney transplant. You will have several visits over a period of several weeks or months. You will need to have blood drawn and x-rays taken. Tests done before the procedure include: Tissue and blood typing to help make sure your body will not reject the donated kidney Blood tests or skin tests to check for infections Heart tests such as an EKG, echocardiogram, or cardiac catheterization Tests to look for early cancer You will also want to consider one or more transplant centers to determine which is best for you. Ask the center how many transplants they perform every year and what their survival rates are. Compare these numbers to those of other transplant centers. Ask about support groups they have available and what type of travel and housing arrangements they offer. If the transplant team believes you are a good candidate for a kidney transplant, you will be put on a national waiting list. Your place on a waiting list is based on a number of factors. Key factors include the type of kidney problems you have, how severe your heart disease is, and the likelihood that a transplant will be successful. For adults, the amount of time you spend on a waiting list is not often a factor in how soon you get a kidney. Most people waiting for a kidney transplant are on dialysis. While you are waiting for a kidney: Follow any diet your transplant team recommends. Do not drink alcohol. Do not smoke. Keep your weight in the range that has been recommended. Follow any recommended exercise program. Take all medicines as they have been prescribed for you. Report any changes in your medicines and any new or worsening medical problems to the transplant team. Go to all regular visits with your regular doctor and transplant team. Make sure the transplant team has the correct phone numbers so they can contact you right away if a kidney becomes available. Always make sure that you can be contacted quickly and easily. Have everything ready in advance to go to the hospital. After the Procedure 
 
 If you have received a donated kidney, you will need to stay in the hospital for about 3 to 7 days. You will need close follow-up by a doctor and regular blood tests for 1 to 2 months. The recovery period is about 6 months. Often, your transplant team will ask you to stay close to the hospital for the first 3 months. You will need to have regular check-ups with blood tests and x-rays for many years. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Almost everyone feels that they have a better quality of life after the transplant. Those who receive a kidney from a living related donor do better than those who receive a kidney from a donor who has died. If you donate a kidney, you can most often live safely without complications with your one remaining kidney. People who receive a transplanted kidney may reject the new organ. This means that their immune system sees the new kidney as a foreign substance and tries to destroy it. In order to avoid rejection, almost all kidney transplant recipients must take medicines that suppress their immune response for the rest of their life. This is called immunosuppressive therapy. Although the treatment helps prevent organ rejection, it also puts patients at a higher risk for infection and cancer. If you take this medicine, you need to be screened for cancer. The medicines may also cause high blood pressure and high cholesterol and increase the risk for diabetes. A successful kidney transplant requires close follow-up with your doctor and you must always take your medicine as directed. Alternative Names 
 
 Renal transplant; Transplant - kidney Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 Kidneys 
 Kidney transplant  - series 
 References 
 
 Barry JM, Conlin MJ. In: Renal transplantation. Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 44. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Transplant Work Group. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for the care of kidney transplant recipients.  Am J Transplant . 2009 Nov;9 Suppl 3:S1-155. PMID: 19845597  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19845597 .  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Corneal transplant 
 Diabetes 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 High blood pressure 
 Liver disease 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Kidney removal - discharge 
 Review Date 6/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Transplantation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia