
 Kidney removal 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Kidney removal, or nephrectomy, is surgery to remove all or part of a kidney. It may involve: Part of one kidney removed (partial nephrectomy) All of one kidney removed (simple nephrectomy) Removal of one entire kidney, surrounding fat, and the adrenal gland (radical nephrectomy). In these cases, neighboring lymph nodes are sometimes removed. Description 
 
 This surgery is done in the hospital while you are asleep and pain-free (general anesthesia). The procedure can take 3 or more hours. Simple nephrectomy or open kidney removal: You will be lying on your side. Your surgeon will make an incision (cut) up to 12 inches (30 centimeters) long. This cut will be on your side, just below the ribs or right over the lowest ribs. Muscle, fat, and tissue are cut and moved. Your surgeon may need to remove a rib to do the procedure. The tube that carries urine from the kidney to the bladder (ureter) and blood vessels are cut away from the kidney. The kidney is then removed. Sometimes, just a part of the kidney may be removed The cut is then closed with stitches or staples.  Radical nephrectomy or open kidney removal: Your surgeon will make a cut about 8 to 12 inches (20 to 30 centimeters) long. This cut will be on the front of your belly, just below your ribs. It may also be done through your side. Muscle, fat, and tissue are cut and moved. The tube that carries urine from the kidney to the bladder (ureter) and blood vessels are cut away from the kidney. The kidney is then removed. Your surgeon will also take out the surrounding fat, and sometimes the adrenal gland and some lymph nodes. The cut is then closed with stitches or staples.  Laparoscopic kidney removal: Your surgeon will make 3 or 4 small cuts, usually no more than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) each, in your belly and side. The surgeon will use tiny probes and a camera to do the surgery. Towards the end of the procedure, your surgeon will make one of the cuts larger (around 4 inches or 10 centimeters) to take out the kidney. The surgeon will cut the ureter, place a bag around the kidney, and pull it through the larger cut. This surgery may take longer than an open kidney removal. However, most people recover faster and feel less pain after this type of surgery when compared to the pain and recovery period following open surgery.  Sometimes, your surgeon may make a cut in a different place than described above. Some hospitals and medical centers are doing this  surgery using robots .  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Kidney removal may be recommended for: Someone donating a kidney Birth defects Kidney cancer A kidney damaged by infection,  kidney stones , or other problems To help control  high blood pressure   in someone who has problems with the blood supply to their kidney Very bad injury (trauma) to the kidney that cannot be repaired Risks 
 
 Risks for any surgery are: Blood clots  in the legs that may travel to the lungs Breathing problems Infection, including in the surgical wound, lungs ( pneumonia ), bladder, or kidney Blood loss Heart attack  or  stroke  during surgery Reactions to medications Risks for this procedure are: Injury to other organs or structures Kidney failure  in the remaining kidney After one kidney is removed, your other kidney may not work as well for awhile Hernia of your surgical wound Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider: If you could be pregnant What drugs you are taking, even drugs or herbs you bought without a prescription During the days before the surgery: You will have blood samples taken in case you need a blood transfusion. You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), Clopidogrel (Plavix), warfarin (Coumadin), and other blood thinners. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of the surgery. Do not smoke. This will help you to recover quicker. On the day of the surgery: You will most often be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before the surgery. Take the drugs as you have been told, with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital. After the Procedure 
 
 You will stay in the hospital for 2 to 7 days, depending on the type of surgery you have. During a hospital stay, you may: Be asked to sit on the side of the bed and walk on the same day of your surgery Have a tube, or catheter, that comes from your bladder Have a drain that comes out through your surgical cut Not be able to eat the first 1 to 3 days, and then you will begin with liquids Be encouraged to do breathing exercises Wear special stockings to prevent blood clots Receive shots under your skin to prevent blood clots Receive pain medicine into your veins or pills  Recovering from open surgery may be painful because of where the surgical cut is located. Recovery after a laparoscopic procedure is most often quicker, with less pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is most often good when a single kidney is removed. If both kidneys are removed, or the remaining kidney does not work well enough, you will need hemodialysis or a  kidney transplant . Alternative Names 
 
 Nephrectomy; Simple nephrectomy; Radical nephrectomy; Open nephrectomy; Laparoscopic nephrectomy; Partial nephrectomy Images 
 
 
 Kidneys 
 Kidney removal  - series 
 References 
 
 Kavoussi LR, Schwartz MJ, Gill IS. Laparoscopic surgery of the kidney. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 55.  Kenney PA, Wotkowicz T, Libertino JA. Contemporary open surgery of the kidney. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 54. Read More 
 
 High blood pressure 
 Kidney transplant 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bathroom safety - adults 
 Kidney removal - discharge 
 Preventing falls 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia