
 Knock knees 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Knock knees is a condition in which the knees touch, but the ankles do not touch. The legs turn inward. Causes 
 
 Infants start out with bowlegs because of their folded position while in their mother's womb. The legs begin to straighten once the child starts to walk (at about 12 to 18 months). By age 3, the child becomes knock-kneed. When the child stands, the knees touch but the ankles are apart. By puberty, the legs straighten out and most children can stand with the knees and ankles touching (without forcing the position). Knock knees can also develop as a result of a medical problem or disease, such as: Injury of the shinbone (only one leg will be knock-kneed) Osteomyelitis (bone infection) Overweight or obesity Rickets (a disease caused by a lack of vitamin D)  Exams and Tests 
 
 A health care provider will examine your child. Tests will be done if there are signs that knock knees are not a part of normal development.  Treatment 
 
 Knock knees are not treated in most cases. If the problem continues after age 7, the child may use a night brace. This brace is attached to a shoe.  Surgery may be considered for knock knees that are severe and continue beyond late childhood.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Children normally outgrow knock knees without treatment, unless it is caused by a disease.  If surgery is needed, the results are most often good. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Difficulty walking (very rare) Self-esteem changes related to cosmetic appearance of knock knees If left untreated, knock knees can lead to early arthritis of the knee  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you think your child has knock knees. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention for normal knock knees. Alternative Names 
 
 Genu valgum References 
 
 Wells L, Sehgal K. Normal Limb Development. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 667.1. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Leg Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia