
 Kuru 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Kuru is a disease of the nervous system. Causes 
 
 Kuru is a very rare disease. It is caused by an infectious protein found in contaminated human brain tissue. Kuru is found among people from New Guinea who practiced a form of cannibalism in which they ate the brains of dead people as part of a funeral ritual. This practice stopped in 1960, but cases of kuru were reported for many years afterward because the disease has a long incubation period. The incubation period is the time it takes for symptoms to appear after being exposed to the agent that causes disease. Kuru causes brain and nervous system changes similar to  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease . Similar diseases appear in cows as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), also called mad cow disease. The main risk factor for kuru is eating human brain tissue, which can contain the infectious particles. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of kuru include: Arm and leg pain Coordination problems that become severe Difficulty walking Headache Swallowing difficulty Tremors and muscle jerks  Difficulty swallowing and being unable to feed oneself can lead to  malnutrition  or starvation. The average incubation period is 10 to 13 years, but incubation periods of 50 years or even longer have been reported. Exams and Tests 
 
 A neurologic exam may show changes in coordination and walking ability. Treatment 
 
 There is no known treatment for kuru. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Death usually occurs within 1 year after the first sign of symptoms. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider if you have any walking, swallowing, or coordination problems. Kuru is extremely rare. Your provider will rule out other neurologic diseases.  Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Bosque PJ. Prion diseases. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 424. Bosque PJ, Tyler KL. Prions and prion diseases of the central nervous system (transmissible neurodegenerative diseases). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 181. Read More 
 
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 
 Degenerative Nerve Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia