
 Lacrimal gland tumor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lacrimal gland tumor is a  tumor  in 1 of the glands that produces tears. The lacrimal gland is located under the outer part of each eyebrow. Lacrimal gland tumors can be harmless ( benign ) or cancerous ( malignant ). About half of lacrimal gland tumors are benign. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Double vision Fullness in 1 eyelid or the side of the face Pain  Exams and Tests 
 
 You may first be examined by an eye doctor (ophthalmologist). You may then be evaluated by a head and neck doctor (otolaryngologist, or ENT), or a doctor who specializes in problems with the bony eye socket (orbit). Tests most often include a  CT  or  MRI scan . Treatment 
 
 Most lacrimal gland tumors will need to be removed with surgery. Cancerous tumors may need other treatment too, such as radiation or chemotherapy. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is most often excellent for noncancerous growths. The outlook for cancer depends on the type of cancer and stage at which it is discovered. Images 
 
 
 Lacrimal gland anatomy 
 References 
 
 Hayek B, Esmali B. Lacrimal gland tumors. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 16th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:chap 40. Karcioglu ZA, Haik BG. Eye, orbit, and adnexal structures. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 67 Melicher-Larson JS, Jones YJ, Nerad JA. Secondary orbital tumors. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 16th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:chap 46. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Malignancy 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Eye Cancer 
 Tears 
 Browse the Encyclopedia