
 Legionnaire disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Legionnaire disease is an infection of the lungs and airways. It is caused by  Legionella  bacteria. Causes 
 
 The bacteria that cause Legionnaire disease have been found in water delivery systems. They can survive in the warm, moist air conditioning systems of large buildings, including hospitals. Most cases are caused by the bacteria  Legionella pneumophila . The rest of the cases are caused by other  Legionella  species. Spread of the bacteria from person to person has not been proven. Most infections occur in middle-aged or older people. In rare cases, children can get the infection. When they do, the disease is less severe. Risk factors include: Alcohol abuse Cigarette smoking Chronic illnesses, such as  kidney failure  or  diabetes Long-term (chronic) lung disease, such as  COPD Long-term use of a breathing machine (ventilator) Medicines that suppress the immune system, including chemotherapy and steroid drugs Older age  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms tend to get worse during the first 4 to 6 days. They most often improve in another 4 to 5 days. Symptoms may include: Chest pain Cough that does not produce much sputum or mucus (dry cough) Coughing up blood Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain Fever, shaking chills General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Headache Joint pain Loss of energy Muscle aches and stiffness Problems with balance Shortness of breath  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Abnormal sounds called crackles may be heard when listening to the chest with a stethoscope. Tests that may be done include: Arterial blood gases Blood cultures Bronchoscopy Chest x-ray Complete blood count ( CBC ), including  white blood cell count ESR  (sed rate) Liver blood tests Tests and cultures on sputum to identify the  Legionella  bacteria Urine tests to check for  Legionella pneumophila  bacteria  Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to fight the infection. Treatment is started as soon as Legionnaire disease is suspected, without waiting for results of any lab test. Other treatments may include receiving: Fluids through a vein (IV)  Oxygen, which is given through a mask or breathing machine Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Legionnaire disease can be life-threatening. The risk of dying is higher in people who: Have chronic diseases Become infected while in the hospital Are elderly  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have any type of breathing problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Legionella pneumonia; Pontiac fever; Legionellosis Images 
 
 
 Legionnaires' disease organism, legionella 
 References 
 
 Edelstein PH, Roy CR. Legionnaires' disease and Pontiac fever. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 234. Marrie TJ.  Legionella  infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 314. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Legionnaires' Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia