
 LEOPARD syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 LEOPARD syndrome is a very rare inherited disorder in which there are problems with the skin, face, and heart. Causes 
 
 LEOPARD syndrome is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. This means the person only needs the abnormal gene from one parent in order to inherit the disease. Symptoms 
 
 LEOPARD stands for the different problems (signs and symptoms) of this disorder: L entigines – large number of brown or black freckle-like skin markings that mainly affect the neck and upper chest but can appear all over the body Electrocardiograph  conduction abnormalities – problems with the electrical and pumping functions of the heart O cular hypertelorism – eyes that are spaced wide apart Pulmonary valve stenosis  – narrowing of the pulmonary heart valve, resulting in less blood flow to the lungs and causing shortness of breath A bnormalities of the genitals – such as  undescended testicles R etardation of growth ( delayed growth ) – including bone growth problems of the chest and spine D eafness – hearing loss may vary between mild and severe Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and listen to the heart with a stethoscope.  Tests that may be done include: ECG and  echocardiogram Hearing test CT scan of the brain Skull x-ray EEG Blood tests to check certain hormone levels Treatment 
 
 Symptoms are treated as appropriate. A hearing aid may be needed. Hormone treatment may be necessary at the expected time of puberty to cause the normal changes to occur. Laser, cryosurgery (freezing), or bleaching creams may help lighten some of the brown spots on the skin. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications vary and include: Deafness Delayed puberty Heart problems Infertility When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if there are symptoms of this disorder. Call for an appointment with your provider if you have a family history of this disorder and plan to have children. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended for people with a family history of LEOPARD syndrome who want to have children. Images 
 
 
 Pectus excavatum 
 References 
 
 Martínez-Quintana E, Rodríguez-González F. LEOPARD syndrome: clinical features and gene mutations.  Mol Syndromol . 2012;3:145-57. PMID: 23239957  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23239957 .  Porciello R, Divona L, Strano S, Carbone A, Calvieri C, Giustini S. LEOPARD syndrome.  Dermatol Online J . 2008;14(3):7. PMID: 18627709  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18627709 .  Sarkozy A, Digilio MC, Dallapiccola B. LEOPARD syndrome.  Orphanet J Rare Dis . 2008;3:13. PMID: 18505544  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18505544 .  Read More 
 
 Electrocardiogram 
 Hearing loss 
 Hypogonadism 
 Infertility 
 Pulmonary valve stenosis 
 Sensorineural deafness 
 Undescended testicle 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia