
 Leptospirosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Leptospirosis is an infection. It occurs when you come in contact with leptospira bacteria. Causes 
 
 These bacteria can be found in fresh water that has been soiled by animal urine. You may get infected if you come in contact with an infected animal. The infection occurs in warmer climates. Leptospirosis is not spread from person to person, except in very rare cases. Risk factors include: Occupational exposure -- farmers, ranchers, slaughterhouse workers, trappers, veterinarians, loggers, sewer workers, rice field workers, and military personnel Recreational activities -- fresh water swimming, canoeing, kayaking, and trail biking in warm areas Household exposure -- pet dogs, domesticated livestock, rainwater catchment systems, and infected rodents  Weil disease is rare in the continental United States. Hawaii has the highest number of cases in the United States. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can take 2 to 26 days (average 10 days) to develop, and may include: Dry cough Fever Headache Muscle pain Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea Shaking chills Less common symptoms include: Abdominal pain Abnormal lung sounds Bone pain Conjunctivitis Enlarged lymph glands Enlarged spleen  or liver Joint aches Muscle rigidity Muscle tenderness Skin rash Sore throat Exams and Tests 
 
 The blood is tested for antibodies to the bacteria. Other tests that may be done: Complete blood count  (CBC)
    Creatine kinase Liver enzymes Urinalysis Blood cultures Treatment 
 
 Medicines to treat leptospirosis include: Ampicillin Azithromycin Ceftriaxone  Cefotaxime  Doxycycline Penicillin Complicated or serious cases may need supportive care. You may need treatment in a hospital intensive care unit (ICU). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is generally good. However, a complicated case can be fatal if it is not treated promptly. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction when penicillin is given Meningitis Severe bleeding When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you have any symptoms of, or risk factors for, leptospirosis. Prevention 
 
 Avoid areas of stagnant water, especially in tropical climates. If you are exposed to a high risk area take precaution to avoid infection. You can take doxycycline or amoxicillin to decrease the risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Weil disease; Icterohemorrhagic fever; Swineherd's disease; Rice-field fever; Cane-cutter fever; Swamp fever; Mud fever; Hemorrhagic jaundice; Stuttgart disease; Canicola fever Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Haake DA, Levett PN. Leptospira species (leptospirosis). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 241. Muehlenbachs A, Zaki SR. Leptospirosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 323. 
 Review Date 8/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia