
 Leukemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Leukemia is a type of blood cancer that begins in the bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft tissue in the center of the bones, where blood cells are produced. The term leukemia means white blood. White blood cells (leukocytes) are used by the body to fight infections and other foreign substances. Leukocytes are made in the bone marrow. Leukemia leads to an uncontrolled increase in the number of white blood cells. The cancerous cells prevent healthy red cells, platelets, and mature white cells (leukocytes) from being made. Life-threatening symptoms can then develop as normal blood cells decline. The cancer cells can spread to the bloodstream and lymph nodes. They can also travel to the brain and spinal cord (the central nervous system) and other parts of the body. Leukemia can affect children and adults. Leukemias are divided into 2 major types: Acute (which progresses quickly) Chronic (which progresses more slowly)  The main types of leukemia are: Acute lymphocytic leukemia  (ALL) Acute myelogenous leukemia  (AML) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia  (CLL) Chronic myelogenous leukemia  (CML) Hairy cell leukemia Images 
 
 
 Bone marrow aspiration 
 Acute lymphocytic leukemia - photomicrograph 
 Auer rods 
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia - microscopic view 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia - microscopic view 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia 
 Chronic myelocytic leukemia 
 Cryoglobulinemia - of the fingers 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Appelbaum FR. Acute leukemia in adults. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 98. Campana D, Pui CH. Childhood leukemia. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 96. Read More 
 
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
 Acute myeloid leukemia - adult 
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
 Hairy cell leukemia 
 Leukemia - resources 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Leukemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia