
 Lichen simplex chronicus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lichen simplex chronicus (LSC) is a skin condition caused by  chronic  itching and scratching. Causes 
 
 LSC may occur in people who have: Skin allergies Eczema  (atopic dermatitis) Psoriasis Nervousness, anxiety, depression, and other emotional problems  The problem is common in children, who cannot stop scratching insect bites and other itchy skin conditions. It also occurs in children who have chronic repetitive movements. Symptoms 
 
 LSC leads to scratching, which then causes more itching. It often follows this pattern: It may start when something rubs, irritates, or scratches the skin, such as clothing. The person begins to rub or scratch the itchy area. Constant scratching causes the skin to thicken. The thickened skin itches, and this leads to more scratching. This then causes more thickening of the skin. The skin may become leathery and brownish in the affected area. Symptoms include: Itching  of the skin that may be long-term (chronic), intense, and that increases with stress Leathery texture to skin Raw areas of skin Scaling Skin lesion , patch, or plaque with sharp borders and a leathery texture, located on the ankle, wrist, neck, rectum, anal area, forearms, thighs, lower leg, back of the knee, and inner elbow Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at your skin and ask if you have had chronic itching and scratching in the past. A  skin lesion biopsy  may be done to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 The main treatment is to reduce the itch. You may need to use these medicines on your skin: Lotion or steroid cream on the area to calm itching and irritation Numbing medicine Peeling ointments containing salicylic acid on patches of thick skin Soaps or lotions containing coal tar You many need to use dressings that moisturize, cover, and protect the area. These may be used with or without medicated creams. They are left in place for a week or more at a time. To control itching and stress you may need to take medicines by mouth, such as: Antihistamines Other oral medicines that control itch or pain Steroids may be injected directly into the skin patches to reduce itching and irritation. You may need to take antidepressants and tranquilizers if the cause of your itching is emotional. Other measures include: Counseling to help you realize the importance of not scratching Stress management Behavior modification Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You can control LSC by reducing itch and controlling scratching. The condition may return or move to different areas on the skin. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications of LSC can occur: Bacterial skin infection Permanent changes in skin color Permanent scar When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: Symptoms get worse You develop new symptoms, especially signs of skin infection such as pain, redness, drainage from the area, or fever  Alternative Names 
 
 LSC; Neurodermatitis circumscripta; Eczema - lichen simplex chronicus; Atopic dermatitis - lichen simplex chronicus; Psoriasis - lichen simplex chronicus Images 
 
 
 Lichen simplex chronicus on the ankle 
 Lichen simplex chronicus 
 Lichen simplex chronicus on the back 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Eczema and hand dermatitis. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 3. Sommer LL, Millett CR, Baker DJ. Lichen simplex chronicus. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 131. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Psoriasis 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Itching 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia