
 Lipoprotein-a 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lipoproteins are molecules made of  proteins  and fat. They carry cholesterol and similar substances through the blood. A blood test can be done to measure a specific type of lipoprotein called lipoprotein-a, or Lp(a). A high level of Lp(a) is considered a risk factor for heart disease.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will be asked not to eat anything for 12 hours before the test. DO NOT smoke before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 A needle is inserted to draw blood. You may feel slight pain, or only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 High levels of lipoproteins can increase the risk of heart disease. The test is done to check your risk of  atherosclerosis , stroke, and heart attack. It is not yet clear if this measurement leads to improved benefits for patients. Therefore, many insurance companies DO NOT pay for it.  The American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology DO NOT recommend the test for most adults who DO NOT have symptoms. It may be useful for people at higher risk because of a strong family history of cardiovascular disease. Normal Results 
 
 Normal values are below 30 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter), or 1.7 mmol/L. Note: Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. The example above shows the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Higher than normal values of Lp(a) are associated with a high risk for atherosclerosis, stroke, and heart attack. Considerations 
 
 Lp(a) measurements may provide more detail about your risk for heart disease, but the added value of this test beyond a standard lipid panel is unknown. Alternative Names 
 
 Lp(a) References 
 
 Genest J, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56(25):e50-e103. PMID: 21144964  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21144964 . Semenkovich, CF. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 206. Read More 
 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Heart attack 
 Protein in diet 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Heart Attack 
 Stroke 
 Browse the Encyclopedia