
 Listeriosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Listeriosis is an infection that can occur when a person eats food that has been contaminated with bacteria called  Listeria monocytogenes  ( L. monocytogenes ). Causes 
 
 The bacteria  Listeria monocytogenes  is found in wild animals, domesticated animals, and in soil and water. These bacteria make many animals sick, leading to miscarriage and stillbirth in domestic animals. Vegetables, meats, and other foods can get infected with the bacteria if they come in contact with contaminated soil or manure. Raw milk or products made from raw milk may carry these bacteria. If you eat the contaminated products, you may get sick. The following people are at increased risk: Adults over age 50 Adults with a weakened immune system Developing fetuses Newborns Pregnant women The bacteria most often cause a gastrointestinal illness. In some cases, you can develop a blood infection ( septicemia ) or inflammation of the covering of the brain ( meningitis ). Infants and children often have meningitis. Infection in early pregnancy may cause a miscarriage. The bacteria may cross the placenta and infect the developing baby. Infections in late pregnancy may lead to stillbirth or death of the infant within a few hours of birth. About half of infants infected at or near birth will die. In adults, the disease may take many forms, depending on what organ or organ systems are infected. It may occur as: Heart infection ( endocarditis )  Brain or spinal fluid injection (meningitis) Lung infection ( pneumonia )  Blood infection (septicemia) Or it may occur in a milder form as: Abscesses Conjunctivitis Gastroenteritis Skin lesion Symptoms 
 
 In infants, symptoms of listeriosis may be seen in the first few days of life and may include: Loss of appetite Lethargy Jaundice Respiratory  distress (usually pneumonia) Shock Skin rash Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Laboratory tests may be done to detect the bacteria in amniotic fluid, blood, feces, and urine. A  spinal fluid (cerebrospnial fluid or CSF) culture  will be performed if a spinal tap is performed. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics (including ampicillin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) are prescribed to kill the bacteria. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Listeriosis in a fetus or infant is often fatal. Healthy older children and adults are more likely to survive. The illness is less serious if it only affects the gastrointestinal system. Brain or spinal infections have worse outcomes. Possible Complications 
 
 Infants who survive listeriosis may have long-term brain and nervous system (neurologic) damage and delayed development. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you or your child develops symptoms of listeriosis. Prevention 
 
 Foreign food products, such as nonpasteurized soft cheeses, have also led to outbreaks of listeriosis. Always cook food thoroughly. Wash your hands thoroughly after touching pets, farm animals, and handling animal feces. Pregnant women may want to visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website for information on food precautions:  www.cdc.gov/listeria/prevention.html . Alternative Names 
 
 Listerial infection; Granulomatosis infantisepticum; Fetal listeriosis Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Kollman TR, Mailman TL, Bortolussi R. Listeriosis. In: Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado YA, Remington JS, Klein JO, eds.  Remington and Klein's Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn Infant . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 13. Lorber B.  Listeria monocytogenes . In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 208. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Conjunctivitis or pink eye 
 Endocarditis 
 Fatigue 
 Meningitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Rashes 
 Respiratory 
 Septicemia 
 Shock 
 
 Review Date 9/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Listeria Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia