
 Liver scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A liver scan uses a radioactive material to check how well the liver or spleen is working and to assess masses in the liver. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider will inject a radioactive material called a radioisotope into one of your veins. After the liver has soaked up the material, you will be asked to lie on a table under the scanner. The scanner can tell where the radioactive material has gathered in the body. Images are displayed on a computer. You may be asked to remain still, or to change positions during the scan. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must sign a consent form. You will be asked to remove jewelry, dentures, and other metals that can affect the scanner's functions. You may need to wear a hospital gown. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel a sharp prick when the needle is inserted into your vein. You should not feel anything during the actual scan. If you have problems lying still or are very anxious, you may be given a mild medicine (sedative) to help you relax. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test can provide information about liver and spleen function. It is also used to help confirm other test results. The most common use for a liver scan is to diagnose a condition called benign focal nodular hyperplasia, or FNH, which causes a non-cancerous mass in the liver.  Normal Results 
 
 The liver and spleen should look normal in size, shape, and location. The radioisotope is absorbed evenly. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may indicate: Focal nodular hyperplasia or adenoma of the liver Abscess Budd-Chiari syndrome Infection Liver disease  (such as  cirrhosis  or  hepatitis ) Superior vena cava obstruction Splenic infarction  (tissue death) Tumors  Risks 
 
 Radiation from any scan is always a slight concern. The level of radiation in this procedure is less than that of most x-rays. It is not considered to be enough to cause harm to the average person. Pregnant or nursing women should consult their provider before any exposure to radiation. Considerations 
 
 Other tests may be needed to confirm the findings of this test. These may include: Abdominal ultrasound Abdominal CT scan Liver biopsy Instead of a liver scan, CT or MRI scans are more often used to evaluate the liver and spleen. Alternative Names 
 
 Technetium scan; Liver technetium sulfur colloid scan; Liver-spleen radionuclide scan; Nuclear scan - technetium; Nuclear scan - liver or spleen Images 
 
 
 Liver scan 
 References 
 
 Lidofsky S. Jaundice. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 20. Lomas DJ, Mannelli L. The liver and spleen. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Amebic liver abscess 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari) 
 Hepatitis 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Liver disease 
 Splenic infarction 
 SVC obstruction 
 
 Review Date 1/18/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Diseases 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Spleen Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia