
 Liver spots 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Liver spots are flat, brown or black spots that can appear on areas of the skin that are exposed to the sun. They have nothing to do with the liver or liver function. Causes 
 
 Liver spots are changes in skin color that occur in older skin. The coloring may be due to aging, exposure to the sun or other sources of ultraviolet light, or causes that are not known. Liver spots are very common after age 40. They occur most often on areas that have had the greatest sun exposure, such as the: Backs of the hands Face Forearms Forehead Shoulders Symptoms 
 
 Liver spots appear as a  patch  or area of skin color change that is: Flat Light brown to black Painless  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider usually diagnoses the condition based on how your skin looks, especially if you are over 40 and have had a lot of sun exposure. You may need a skin biopsy to confirm the diagnosis if you have a liver spot that looks irregular. Treatment 
 
 Most of the time, no treatment is needed. Talk to your provider about using bleaching lotions or creams. Most bleaching products use hydroquinone. This medicine is thought to be safe in the form used to lighten darkened skin areas. However, hydroquinone can cause blisters or skin reactions in sensitive people.  Talk to your provider about other treatment options, including: Freezing ( cryotherapy ) Laser treatment Intense pulsed light Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Liver spots are not dangerous to your health. They are permanent skin changes that affect how your skin looks. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have liver spots and want them removed You develop any new symptoms, especially changes in the appearance of a liver spot Prevention 
 
 Protect your skin from the sun  by taking the following steps: Cover your skin with clothing such as hats, long-sleeved shirts, long skirts, or pants. Use sunglasses to protect your eyes. Try to avoid the sun at midday, when sunlight is strongest. Use high-quality broad-spectrum sunscreens that have an SPF rating of at least 30. Apply sunscreen at least a half hour before you go out in the sun. Reapply it often. Use sunscreen in the winter, too.  Alternative Names 
 
 Sun-induced skin changes - liver spots; Senile or solar lentigines; Skin spots - aging; Age spots Images 
 
 
 Lentigo, solar on the back 
 Lentigo, solar with erythema on the arm 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Light-related diseases and disorders of pigmentation. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 19. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Melanocytic nevi and neoplasms. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 30. 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Aging 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia