
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hepatocellular carcinoma is cancer that starts in the liver. Causes 
 
 Hepatocellular carcinoma accounts for most liver cancers. This type of cancer occurs more often in men than women. It is usually diagnosed in people age 50 or older. Hepatocellular carcinoma is not the same as  metastatic liver cancer , which starts in another organ (such as the breast or colon) and spreads to the liver. In most cases, the cause of liver cancer is long-term damage and scarring of the liver ( cirrhosis ). Cirrhosis may be caused by: Alcohol abuse Autoimmune diseases  of the liver Hepatitis B  or  C  virus infection Inflammation of the liver that is long-term (chronic) Iron overload in the body ( hemochromatosis ) People with hepatitis B or C are at high risk of liver cancer, even if they do not develop cirrhosis. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of liver cancer may include any of the following: Abdominal pain  or tenderness, especially in the upper-right part Easy bruising or bleeding Enlarged abdomen Yellow skin or eyes (jaundice) Unexplained weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. The physical exam may show an enlarged, tender liver or other signs of cirrhosis. If the doctor suspects liver cancer, tests that may be ordered include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal ultrasound Liver biopsy Liver enzymes ( liver function tests ) Liver  MRI Serum alpha fetoprotein Some people who have a high chance of developing liver cancer may get regular blood tests and ultrasounds to see whether tumors are developing. To accurately diagnose hepatocellular carcinoma, a  biopsy  of the tumor must be done. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on how advanced the cancer is. Surgery may be done if the tumor has not spread. Before surgery, the tumor may be treated with  chemotherapy  to reduce its size. This is done by delivering the medicine straight into the liver with a tube (catheter) or by giving it intravenously (by IV). Radiation treatments in the area of the cancer may also be helpful. But in people who have liver cirrhosis or other liver diseases, radiation is difficult to perform. Ablation is another method that may be used. Ablate means to destroy. Types of ablation include using: Radio waves or microwaves Ethanol (an alcohol) or acetic acid (vinegar) Extreme cold (cryoablation) A  liver transplant  may be recommended for certain people who have both cancer and cirrhosis. If the cancer can't be surgically removed or has spread outside the liver, there is usually no chance for long-term cure. Treatment instead focuses on improving and extending one's life. Treatment in this case is chemotherapy, and can be taken as pills or given through a vein (by IV).  Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the cancer cannot be completely removed, the disease is usually fatal within 3 to 6 months. But survival can vary depending on how advanced the cancer is when diagnosed and how successful treatment is. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop ongoing abdominal pain, especially if you have a history of any  liver disease . Prevention 
 
 Preventive measures include: Preventing and treating viral hepatitis may help reduce your risk. Childhood vaccination against hepatitis B may reduce the risk of liver cancer in the future. Do not drink excessive amounts of alcohol. People with certain types of hemochromatosis (iron overload) may need to be screened for liver cancer. People who have hepatitis B or C or cirrhosis may be recommended for liver cancer screening. Alternative Names 
 
 Primary liver cell carcinoma; Tumor - liver; Cancer - liver; Hepatoma  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Liver biopsy 
 Hepatocellular cancer, CT scan 
 References 
 
 Abou-Alfa GK, Jarnagin W, Lowery M, et al. Liver and bile duct cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 80. Di Bisceglie AM, Befeler AS. Hepatic tumors and cysts. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 96. National Cancer Institute. PDQ Adult primary liver cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD. Date last modified July 31, 2015. Available at:  www.cancer.gov/types/liver/hp/adult-liver-treatment-pdq . Accessed September 24, 2015. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Hepatobiliary cancers. Version 2.2015. Available at:  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/hepatobiliary.pdf . Accessed September 24, 2015. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Metastasis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Liver Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia