
 Liver biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A liver  biopsy  is a test that takes a sample of tissue from the liver for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Most of the time, the test is done in the hospital. Before the test is done, you may be given a medicine to prevent pain or to calm you (sedative).  The biopsy may be done through the abdominal wall: You will lie on your back with your right hand under your head. You need to stay as still as you can. The health care provider will find the correct spot for the biopsy needle to be inserted into the liver. This is often done by using ultrasound. The skin is cleaned, and numbing medicine is injected into the area using a small needle. A small cut is made, and the biopsy needle is inserted. You will be told to hold your breath while the biopsy is taken. This is to reduce the chance of damage to the lung or liver. The needle is removed quickly. Pressure will be applied to stop the bleeding. A bandage is placed over the insertion site.  The procedure can also be done by inserting a needle into the jugular vein. If the procedure is performed this way, you will lie on your back. X-rays will be used to guide the health care provider to the vein. A special needle and catheter (thin tube) is used to take the biopsy sample.  If you receive sedation for this test, you will need someone to drive you home. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell your health care provider about: Bleeding problems Drug allergies Medicines you are taking Whether you are pregnant  You must sign a consent form. Blood tests are sometimes done to test your blood's ability to clot. You will be told not to eat or drink anything for the 8 hours before the test. For infants and children: The preparation needed for a child depends on the child's age and maturity. Your child's provider will tell you what you can do to prepare your child for this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will feel a stinging pain when the anesthetic is injected. The biopsy needle may feel like deep pressure and dull pain. Some people feel this pain in the shoulder. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The biopsy helps diagnose many  liver diseases . The procedure also helps assess the stage (early, advanced) of liver disease. This is especially important in hepatitis C infection. The biopsy also helps detect: Cancer Infections The cause of abnormal levels of liver enzymes that have been found in blood tests The cause of an unexplained liver enlargement  Normal Results 
 
 The liver tissue is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The biopsy may reveal a number of liver diseases, including  cirrhosis ,  hepatitis , or infections such as  tuberculosis . It may also indicate cancer. This test also may be performed for: Alcoholic liver disease   (fatty liver, hepatitis, or cirrhosis) Amebic liver abscess Autoimmune hepatitis Biliary atresia Chronic active hepatitis Chronic persistent hepatitis Disseminated coccidioidomycosis Hemochromatosis Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hepatitis D Hepatocellular carcinoma Hodgkin's lymphoma Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma Primary biliary cirrhosis Pyogenic liver abscess Reye syndrome Sclerosing cholangitis Wilson's disease Risks 
 
 Risks may include: Collapsed lung Complications from the sedation Injury to the gallbladder or kidney Internal bleeding  Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - liver; Percutaneous biopsy Images 
 
 
 Liver biopsy 
 References 
 
 Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:section IX. Lomas DJ and Mannelli L. The liver and spleen. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Alcoholic liver disease 
 Amebic liver abscess 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Biliary atresia 
 Cirrhosis 
 Delta agent (Hepatitis D) 
 Hemochromatosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Hepatitis C 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 Liver disease 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Pyogenic liver abscess 
 Reye syndrome 
 Sclerosing cholangitis 
 Wilson disease 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with gastrointestinal specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatitis 
 Hepatitis C 
 Liver Cancer 
 Liver Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia