
 Low potassium level 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Low potassium level is a condition in which the amount of potassium in the blood is lower than normal. The medical name of this condition is hypokalemia.  Causes 
 
 Potassium is needed for cells to function properly. You get potassium through food. The kidneys remove excess potassium through the urinary system to keep a proper balance of the mineral in the body. Common causes of low potassium level include: Antibiotics
  Diarrhea or vomiting
  Using too much laxative, which can cause diarrhea
  Chronic kidney disease
  Diuretic medicines (water pills), used to treat heart failure and high blood pressure
  Eating disorders (such as  bulimia )
  Low magnesium level Sweating
  Symptoms 
 
 A small drop in potassium level often does not cause symptoms, which may be mild, and may include: Constipation Feeling of skipped heart beats or  palpitations Fatigue
  Muscle damage
  Muscle weakness or spasms
  Tingling or numbness
  A large drop in potassium level may lead to  abnormal heart rhythms , especially in people with heart disease. This can cause you to feel lightheaded or faint. A very low potassium level can even cause your heart to stop. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will order a blood test to check your  potassium level .  Other blood tests may be ordered to check levels of: Glucose, magnesium, calcium, sodium, phosphorous Thyroid hormone Aldosterone An electrocardiogram (ECG) to check the heart may also be done. Treatment 
 
 If your condition is mild, your provider will likely prescribe oral potassium pills. If your condition is severe, you may need to get potassium through a vein (IV). If you need diuretics, your provider may: Switch you to a form that keeps potassium in the body. This type of diuretic is called potassium-sparing. Prescribe extra potassium for you to take every day. Eating foods rich in potassium can help treat and prevent low level of potassium. These foods include: Avocados Baked potato Bananas Bran Carrots Cooked lean beef Milk Oranges Peanut butter Peas and beans Salmon Seaweed Spinach Tomatoes Wheat germ Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Taking potassium supplements can usually correct the problem. In severe cases, without proper treatment, a severe drop in potassium level can lead to serious heart rhythm problems that can be fatal. Possible Complications 
 
 In severe cases, life-threatening paralysis may develop. This is more common when there is too much thyroid hormone in the blood. This is called  thyrotoxic periodic paralysis . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider right away if you have been vomiting or have had excessive diarrhea, or if you are taking diuretics and have symptoms of hypokalemia. Alternative Names 
 
 Potassium - low; Low blood potassium; Hypokalemia Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Mount DB, Zandi-Nejad K. Disorders of potassium balance. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 17. Seifter JL. Potassium disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 117. Read More 
 
 Potassium test 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Potassium 
 Browse the Encyclopedia