
 Low magnesium level 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Low magnesium level is a condition in which the amount of magnesium in the blood is lower than normal. The medical name of this condition is hypomagnesemia. Causes 
 
 Every organ in the body, especially the heart, muscles, and kidneys, needs the mineral magnesium. It also contributes to the makeup of teeth and bones. Magnesium is needed for many functions in the body, including the physical and chemical processes in the body that convert or use energy ( metabolism ). When the level of magnesium in the body drops below normal, symptoms of low magnesium may develop. Common causes of low magnesium include: Alcoholism Burns that affect a large area of the body  Chronic  diarrhea Excessive urination (polyuria), such as in uncontrolled diabetes and during recovery from acute kidney failure  High blood calcium level ( hypercalcemia ) Hyperaldosteronism Malabsorption  syndromes, such as  celiac disease  and inflammatory bowel disease Malnutrition Medicines including amphotericin, cisplatin, cyclosporine, diuretics, proton pump inhibitors, and aminoglycoside antibiotics Sweating Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms include: Abnormal eye movements ( nystagmus ) Convulsions Fatigue Muscle spasms or cramps Muscle weakness Numbness Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to help determine the cause of your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include an  electrocardiogram  (ECG). Blood and urine tests that may be done include: Calcium blood test Comprehensive metabolic panel Magnesium blood test Potassium blood test Urine magnesium test Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the type of low magnesium problem and may include: Fluids given through a vein (IV) Magnesium by mouth or through a vein Medicines to relieve symptoms Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome depends on the condition that is causing the problem. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, this condition can lead to: Cardiac arrest Respiratory arrest Death When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 When your body’s magnesium level drops too much, it can be a life-threatening emergency. Call your provider right away if you have symptoms of this condition. Prevention 
 
 Treating the condition that is causing low magnesium can help.  If you play sports or do other vigorous activity, drink fluids such as sports drinks that contain  electrolytes  to keep your magnesium level in a healthy range. Alternative Names 
 
 Low blood magnesium; Magnesium - low; Hypomagnesemia References 
 
 Pfennig CL, Slovis CM. Electrolyte disorders. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 125. Read More 
 
 Celiac disease - sprue 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Hyperaldosteronism - primary and secondary 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
 Browse the Encyclopedia