
 Low-set ears and pinna abnormalities 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Low-set ears and pinna abnormalities refer to an abnormal shape or position of the outer ear (pinna or auricle). Considerations 
 
 The outer ear or "pinna" forms when the baby is growing in the mother's womb. The growth of this ear part takes place at a time when many other organs are developing (such as the kidneys). Abnormal changes in the shape or position of the pinna may be a sign that the baby also has other related problems. Common abnormal findings include cysts in the pinna or  skin tags . Many children are born with ears that stick out. Although people may comment on the ear shape, this condition is a variation of normal and is not linked with other disorders. However, the following problems may be related to medical conditions: Abnormal folds or location of the pinna Low-set ears No opening to the ear canal No pinna No pinna and ear canal (anotia)  Causes 
 
 Common conditions that can cause low-set and unusually formed ears include: Down syndrome Turner syndrome Rare conditions that can cause low-set and malformed ears include: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Potter syndrome Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome Treacher Collins syndrome Trisomy 13 Trisomy 18 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 In most cases, a health care provider finds pinna abnormalities during the first well-baby exam. This exam is most often done at the hospital at the time of delivery. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will: Examine and test the child for other physical abnormalities of the kidneys, bones of the face, skull, and facial nerve Ask if you have a family history of abnormal-shaped ears  To determine whether the pinna is abnormal, the provider will take measurements with a tape measure. Other parts of the body will also be measured, including the eyes, hands, and feet. All newborns should have a hearing test. Exams for any changes in mental development may be performed as the child grows. Genetic testing may also be done. TREATMENT Most of the time, no treatment is needed for pinna abnormalities because they do not affect hearing. However, sometimes cosmetic surgery is recommended. Skin tags may be tied off, unless there is cartilage in them. In that case, surgery is needed to remove them. Ears that stick out may be treated for cosmetic reasons. During the newborn period, a small framework may be attached using tape or Steri-Strips. The child wears this framework for several months. Surgery to correct the ears cannot be done until the child is 5 years old.  More severe abnormalities may require surgery for cosmetic reasons as well as for function. Surgery to create and attach a new ear is often done in stages.  Alternative Names 
 
 Low-set ears; Microtia; "Lop" ear; Pinna abnormalities; Genetic defect-pinna; Congenital defect-pinna Images 
 
 
 Ear abnormalities 
 Pinna of the newborn ear 
 References 
 
 Haddad J, Keesecker S. Congenital malformations. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 638. Parikh AS, Mitchell AL. Congenital anomalies. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Fetal development 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Ear Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia