
 Lower esophageal ring 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lower esophageal ring is an abnormal ring of tissue that forms where the esophagus (the tube from the mouth to the stomach) and stomach meet.  Causes 
 
 A lower esophageal ring is a birth defect of the esophagus that occurs in a small number of people. It causes narrowing of the lower esophagus. Narrowing of the esophagus may also be caused by: Injury Tumors Esophageal stricture Symptoms 
 
 For most people, lower esophageal ring does not cause symptoms. The most common symptom is the feeling that food (especially solid food) is stuck in the lower neck or under the breastbone (sternum).  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that show the lower esophageal ring include: EGD  (esophagogastroduodenoscopy) Upper GI (x-ray with barium) Treatment 
 
 A device called a dilator is passed through the narrowed area to stretch the ring. Sometimes, a balloon is placed in the area and inflated, to help widen the ring. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Swallowing problems may return. You may need repeat treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have swallowing problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Esophagogastric ring; Schatzki's ring Images 
 
 
 Schatzki ring - x-ray 
 Upper gastrointestinal system 
 References 
 
 Long JD, Orlando RC. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the esophagus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010: chap 41. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 GERD 
 Browse the Encyclopedia