
 Lumbar MRI scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses energy from strong magnets to create pictures of the lower part of the spine (lumbar spine). An MRI does not use radiation (x-rays). Single MRI images are called slices. The images can be stored on a computer or printed on film. One exam produces many images. Related exams include: Cervical MRI scan  (neck MRI) MRI How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will wear a hospital gown or clothes without metal snaps or zippers (such as sweatpants and a t-shirt). Make sure you take off your watch, jewelry and watches. Some types of metal can cause blurry images. You will lie on a narrow table that slides into a large tunnel-like tube. Some exams require a special dye (contrast). Most of the time, you will get the dye through a vein (IV) in your hand or arm before the test. You can also get the dye through an injection. The dye helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. During the MRI, the person who operates the machine will watch you from another room. The test most often lasts 30 to 60 minutes, but may take longer. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the scan. Tell your health care provider if you are afraid of closed spaces (have claustrophobia). You may be given a medicine to help you feel sleepy and less anxious. Your provider may suggest an "open" MRI, in which the machine is not as close to the body. Before the test, tell your provider if you have: Brain aneurysm clips Certain types of artificial heart valves Heart defibrillator or pacemaker Inner ear (cochlear) implants Kidney disease or dialysis (you may not be able to receive contrast) Recently placed artificial joints Certain types of vascular  stents Worked with sheet metal in the past (you may need tests to check for metal pieces in your eyes)  Because the MRI contains strong magnets, metal objects are not allowed into the room with the MRI scanner: Pens, pocketknives, and eyeglasses may fly across the room. Items such as jewelry, watches, credit cards, and hearing aids can be damaged. Pins, hairpins, metal zippers, and similar metallic items can distort the images. Removable dental work should be taken out just before the scan.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 An MRI exam causes no pain. You will need to lie still as too much movement can blur MRI images and cause errors. The table may be hard or cold, but you can ask for a blanket or pillow. The machine makes loud thumping and humming noises when turned on. You can wear ear plugs to help block out the noise. An intercom in the room lets you to speak to someone at any time. Some MRIs have televisions and special headphones that you can use to help the time pass. There is no recovery time, unless you were given a medicine to relax. After an MRI scan, you can return to your normal diet, activity, and medicines. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need a lumbar MRI if you have: Low back pain that does not get better after treatment Leg weakness, numbness, or other symptoms that do not improve or get worse  Your provider may also order a lumbar MRI if you have: Back pain and fever Birth defects of the lower spine Injury or trauma to the lower spine Low back pain and a history or signs of cancer Multiple sclerosis Problems controlling or emptying your bladder Disc herniation Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means your spine and nearby nerves look okay. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Most of the time, Abnormal results are due to: Herniated or "slipped" disk ( lumbar radiculopathy ) Narrowing of the spinal column ( spinal stenosis ) Abnormal wearing on the bones and cartilage in the spine (spondylitis)  Other abnormal results may be due to: Ankylosing spondylitis , a type of arthritis Bone infection Cauda equina syndrome Fractures of the lower back  due to osteoporosis Disk inflammation ( diskitis ) Spinal cord abscess Spinal cord injury Spinal tumor Syringomyelia  Talk to your provider about your questions and concerns. Risks 
 
 MRI contains no radiation. There have been no reported side effects from the magnetic fields and radio waves. The most common type of contrast (dye) used is gadolinium. It is very safe. Allergic reactions to this dye are rare. However, gadolinium can be harmful to people with kidney problems that need dialysis. If you have kidney problems, please tell your provider before the test The strong magnetic fields created during an MRI can cause heart pacemakers and other implants to not work as well. It can also cause other pieces of metal inside your body to move or shift. For safety reasons, please do not bring anything that contains metal into the scanner room. Alternative Names 
 
 Magnetic resonance imaging - lumbar spine; MRI - lower back References 
 
 Chou R, Qaseem A, Owens DK, Shekelle P; for the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Diagnostic Imaging for Low Back Pain: Advice for High-Value Health Care From the American College of Physicians.  Ann Intern Med . 2011 Feb 1;154(3):181-9. PMID: 21282698  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21282698 .  Gardocki RJ, Camillo FX,.Other disorders of the spine. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 44. Katz JN, Harris MB. Clinical practice. Lumbar spinal stenosis.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358(8):818-25. PMID: 18287604  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18287604 .  Wilkinson ID, Graves MJ.. Magnetic resonance imaging: In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 5. 
 Review Date 3/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ankylosing Spondylitis 
 Back Pain 
 Herniated Disk 
 MRI Scans 
 Osteoporosis 
 Scoliosis 
 Spinal Cord Injuries 
 Spinal Stenosis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Syringomyelia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia