
 Lumbar spine CT scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A computed tomography (CT) scan of the lumbar spine makes cross-sectional pictures of the lower back (lumbar spine). It uses x-rays to create the images. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the CT scanner. Once you are inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you. (Modern "spiral" scanners can perform the exam without stopping.) A computer creates separate images of the spine area, called slices. These images can be stored, viewed on a monitor, or printed on film. Three-dimensional models of the spine area can be created by adding the slices together. You must be still during the exam. Movement can cause blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short periods of time. The scan should take only 10 to 15 minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Some exams use a special dye, called contrast that is put into your body before the test starts. Contrast helps certain areas show up better on the x-rays. Contrast can be given in different ways. It may be given through a vein (IV) in your hand or forearm. It may be given as an injection into the space around the spinal cord.  If contrast is used, you may also be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test. Let your health care provider know if you have ever had a reaction to contrast. You may need to take medicines before the test in order to avoid this problem. If you weigh more than 300 pounds (135 kilograms), find out if the CT machine has a weight limit. Too much weight can cause damage to the scanner's working parts. You will be asked to remove jewelry and wear a hospital gown during the study. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Some people may have discomfort from lying on the hard table. Contrast given through an IV may cause a slight burning feeling, a metal taste in the mouth, and a warm flushing of the body. These feelings are normal and go away in a few seconds. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 CT rapidly makes detailed pictures of the lower back. The test may be used to look for: Birth defects of the spine in children Injury in the lower spine Spine problems when MRI cannot be used  This test can also be used during or after an x-ray of the spinal cord and spinal nerve roots (myelography) or an x-ray of the disk (discography). Normal Results 
 
 Results are considered normal if no problems are seen in the lumbar region in the images. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Birth defects of the spine Bone problems Fracture Lumbar disk herniation Lumbar  spinal stenosis Spondylolisthesis Risks 
 
 Risks of CT scans include: Being exposed to radiation Allergic reaction to contrast dye  CT scans expose you to more radiation than regular x-rays. Having many x-rays or CT scans over time may increase your risk for cancer. However, the risk from any one scan is small. Talk to your provider about this risk and how it weighs against the benefits of the test for your medical problem. Some people have allergies to contrast dye. Let your provider know if you have ever had an allergic reaction to injected contrast dye. The most common type of contrast given into a vein contains iodine. If a person with an iodine allergy is given this type of contrast,  nausea or vomiting ,  sneezing ,  itching , or  hives  may occur. If you must have this type of contrast, you may get antihistamines (such as Benadryl) or steroids before the test. The kidneys help remove iodine out of the body. People with kidney disease or diabetes may need to receive extra fluids after the test to help flush the iodine out of the body.  Rarely, the dye may cause a life-threatening allergic response called anaphylaxis. If you have any trouble breathing during the test, you should tell the scanner operator right away. Scanners come with an intercom and speakers, so the operator can hear you at all times. Considerations 
 
 The lumbar CT scan is good for evaluating large herniated disks, but it can miss smaller ones. This test can be combined with a myelogram to get a better image of the nerve roots and pick up smaller injuries. Alternative Names 
 
 CAT scan - lumbar spine; Computed axial tomography scan - lumbar spine; Computed tomography scan - lumbar spine; CT - lower back References 
 
 Gardocki RJ, Camillo FX. Other disorders of the spine. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 44.  Lauerman W, Russo M.Thoracolumbar spine disorders in the adult. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 128. Shaw AS, Prokop M. Computed tomography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 4. Thomsen HS, Reimer P. Intravascular contrast media for radiology, CT, and MRI In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 2. 
 Review Date 3/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, assistant professor, chief, sports medicine and shoulder service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 CT Scans 
 Herniated Disk 
 Spinal Stenosis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia