
 Lump in the abdomen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A lump in the abdomen is a small area of swelling or  bulge of tissue in the belly . Causes 
 
 Most often, a lump in the abdomen is caused by a hernia. An abdominal hernia occurs when there is a weak spot in the abdominal wall. This allows the internal organs to bulge through the muscles of the abdomen. A hernia may appear after you strain, or lift something heavy, or after a long period of coughing. There are several types of hernias, based on where they occur: Inguinal hernia appears as a bulge in the groin or scrotum. This type is more common in men than women. Incisional hernia can occur through a scar if you have had abdominal surgery. Umbilical hernia  appears as a bulge around the belly button. It occurs when the muscle around the navel does not close completely.  Other causes of a lump in the abdominal wall include: Hematoma (collection of blood under the skin after injury) Lipoma (collection of fatty tissue under the skin) Lymph nodes Tumor of the skin or muscles  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a lump in your abdomen especially if it becomes larger, changes color, or is painful. If you have a hernia, call your provider if:  Your hernia changes in appearance. Your hernia is causing more pain. You have stopped passing gas or feel bloated. You have a fever. There is pain or tenderness around the hernia. You have vomiting or nausea.  The blood supply may be cut off to the organs that stick out through the hernia. This is called a strangulated hernia. This condition is very rare, but it is a medical emergency when it occurs. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, such as: Where is the lump located? When did you first notice the lump in your abdomen? Is it always there, or does it come and go? Does anything make the lump bigger or smaller? What other symptoms do you have?  During the physical exam, you may be asked to cough or strain. Surgery may be needed to correct hernias that do not go away or cause symptoms. The surgery may be done through a large surgical cut, or through a smaller cut into which the surgeon inserts a camera and other instruments. Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal hernia; Hernia - abdominal; Abdominal wall defects; Lump in the abdominal wall; Abdominal wall mass  Images 
 
 
 Infant abdominal hernia (gastroschisis) 
 References 
 
 Malangoni MA, Rosen MJ. Hernias. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 46.
 Turnage RH, Badgwell B. Abdominal wall, umbilicus, peritoneum, mesenteries, omentum, and retroperitoneum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Abdominal mass 
 
 Review Date 7/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hernia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia