
 Lymphadenitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lymphadenitis is an infection of the  lymph nodes  (also called lymph glands). It is a common complication of certain bacterial infections. Causes 
 
 The  lymph system  (lymphatics) is a network of lymph nodes, lymph ducts, lymph vessels, and organs that produce and move a fluid called lymph from tissues to the bloodstream.  The lymph glands, or lymph nodes, are small structures that filter the lymph fluid. There are many white blood cells in the lymph nodes to help fight infection. Lymphadenitis occurs when the glands become enlarged by swelling (inflammation), often in response to bacteria, viruses, or fungi. The swollen glands are usually found near the site of an infection, tumor, or inflammation. Lymphadenitis may occur after skin infections or other infections caused by bacteria such as streptococcus or staphylococcus. Sometimes it is caused by rare infections such as tuberculosis or  cat scratch disease  (Bartonella). Symptoms 
 
  Symptoms may include: Red, tender skin over lymph node Swollen, tender, or hard lymph nodes Lymph nodes may feel rubbery if an  abscess  (pocket of pus) has formed or they have become inflamed. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This includes feeling your lymph nodes and looking for signs of injury or infection around any swollen lymph nodes. A  biopsy  and culture of the affected area or node may reveal the cause of the inflammation.  Blood cultures  may reveal spread of infection to the bloodstream. Treatment 
 
 Lymphadenitis may spread within hours. Treatment should begin right away. Treatment may include: Antibiotics to treat any infection Analgesics  (painkillers) to control pain Anti-inflammatory medicines to reduce inflammation Cool compresses to reduce inflammation and pain Surgery may be needed to drain an abscess. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt treatment with antibiotics usually leads to a complete recovery. It may take weeks, or even months, for swelling to disappear. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated lymphadenitis may lead to: Abscess formation Cellulitis (a skin infection) Fistulas  (seen in lymphadenitis that is due to tuberculosis) Sepsis  (bloodstream infection) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of lymphadenitis. Prevention 
 
 Good general health and hygiene are helpful in the prevention of any infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Lymph node infection; Lymph gland infection; Localized lymphadenopathy Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Immune system structures 
 References 
 
 Pasternack MS, Swartz MN, Morton N. Lymphadenitis and lymphangitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 97. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute 
 Cellulitis 
 Lymphangitis  
 Protein in diet 
 Sepsis 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 Systemic 
 Thrombophlebitis 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia