
 Lymphangitis  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lymphangitis is an infection of the lymph vessels (channels). It is a complication of some bacterial infections. Causes 
 
 The  lymph system  is a network of lymph nodes, lymph ducts, lymph vessels, and organs that produce and move a fluid called lymph from tissues to the bloodstream. Lymphangitis most often results from an  acute  streptococcal infection of the skin. Less often, it is caused by a staphylococcal infection. The infection causes the lymph vessels to become inflamed. Lymphangitis may be a sign that a skin infection is getting worse. The bacteria can spread into the blood, and cause life-threatening problems. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Fever and chills Enlarged and tender lymph nodes (glands) -- usually in the elbow, armpit, or groin General ill feeling (malaise) Headache Loss of appetite Muscle aches Red streaks from the infected area to the armpit or groin (may be faint or obvious) Throbbing pain along the affected area Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam, which includes feeling your lymph nodes. The doctor may look for signs of injury around swollen lymph nodes. A  biopsy  and  culture  of the affected area may reveal the cause of the inflammation. A  blood culture  may be done to see if the infection has spread to the blood. Treatment 
 
 Lymphangitis may spread within hours. Treatment should begin right away. Treatment may include: Antibiotics by mouth or IV (vein) to treat any infection Pain medicine to control pain Anti-inflammatory medicines to reduce inflammation and swelling Warm, moist compresses to reduce inflammation and pain Surgery may be needed to drain an abscess. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Prompt treatment with antibiotics usually leads to a complete recovery. It may take weeks, or even months, for swelling to disappear. The amount of time it takes to recover depends on the cause. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result include: Abscess (collection of pus) Cellulitis (a skin infection) Sepsis  (a general or bloodstream infection) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of lymphangitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Inflamed lymph vessels; Inflammation - lymph vessels; Infected lymph vessels; Infection - lymph vessels Images 
 
 
 Staphylococcal lymphangitis 
 References 
 
 Pasternack MS, Swartz MN. Lymphadenitis and lymphangitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaseer MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 97. Read More 
 
 Lymphadenitis 
 Lymph system 
 Over-the-counter pain relievers 
 Thrombophlebitis 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia