
 Lymph node culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Lymph node culture is a laboratory test done on a sample from a lymph node to identify germs that cause infection. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample is needed from a lymph node. The sample may be taken using a needle to draw fluid (aspiration) from the lymph node or during a  lymph node biopsy . The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, it is placed in a special dish and watched to see if bacteria, fungi, or viruses grow. This process is called a culture. Sometimes, special stains are also used to identify specific cells or microorganisms before culture results are available. If needle aspiration does not provide a good enough sample, the entire lymph node may be removed and sent for culture and other testing. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your health care provider will instruct you on how to prepare for the  lymph node sampling . How the Test will Feel 
 
 When local anesthetic is injected, you will feel a prick and a mild stinging sensation. The site will likely be sore for a few days after the test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this test if you have swollen glands and infection is suspected. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means there was no growth of microorganisms on the lab dish. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results are a sign of a bacterial, fungal, or viral infection. Risks 
 
 Risks may include:  Bleeding Infection (in rare cases, the wound may get infected and you may need to take antibiotics) Nerve injury if the biopsy is done on a lymph node close to nerves (the numbness usually goes away in a few months)  Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - lymph node Images 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Lymph node culture 
 References 
 
 Armitage JO, Bierman PJ. Approach to the patient with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 168. Pasternik MS, Swartz MN. Lymphadenitis and lymphangitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 97. 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Fungal Infections 
 Viral Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia