
 Mallory-Weiss tear 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A Mallory-Weiss tear occurs in the  mucus membrane  of the lower part of the esophagus or upper part of the stomach, near where they join. The tear may bleed. Causes 
 
 Mallory-Weiss tears are most often caused by forceful or long-term  vomiting  or  coughing . They may also be caused by epileptic  convulsions . Any condition that leads to violent and lengthy bouts of coughing or vomiting can cause these tears. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Bloody stools Vomiting blood  (bright red)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests may include: CBC , possibly showing low  hematocrit Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD), more likely to be done when there is active bleeding  Treatment 
 
 The tear usually heals in a few days without treatment. The tear may also be fixed by clips that are put in during an EGD. Surgery is rarely needed. Drugs that suppress stomach acid (proton pump inhibitors or H 2  blockers) may be given, but it is not clear if they are helpful. If  blood loss  has been great, blood transfusions may be needed. In most cases, bleeding stops without treatment within a few hours. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Repeated bleeding is uncommon and the outcome is most often good.  Cirrhosis  of the liver and problems with blood clotting make future bleeding episodes more likely to occur. Possible Complications 
 
 Hemorrhage (loss of blood) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you begin vomiting blood or if you pass bloody stools. Prevention 
 
 Treatments to relieve vomiting and coughing may reduce risk. Avoid excessive  alcohol use . Alternative Names 
 
 Mucosal lacerations - gastroesophageal junction  Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Mallory-Weiss tear 
 Stomach and stomach lining 
 References 
 
 Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage and occult gastrointestinal bleeding. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 137. Katzka DA. Esophageal disorders caused by medications, trauma, and infection. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 46. Kovacs TO, Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 135. Read More 
 
 Cough 
 Incidence 
 Mucosa 
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Clinical Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Browse the Encyclopedia