
 Malnutrition 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Malnutrition is the condition that occurs when your body does not get enough nutrients. Causes 
 
 There are many types of malnutrition, and they have different causes. Some causes include: Poor diet Starvation due to food not being available Eating disorders Problems with digesting food or absorbing nutrients from food Certain medical conditions that make a person unable to eat  You may develop malnutrition if you lack a single vitamin in your diet. Lacking a vitamin or other nutrient is called a deficiency.  Sometimes malnutrition is very mild and causes no symptoms. Other times it can be so severe that the damage it does to the body is permanent, even though you survive. Poverty, natural disasters, political problems, and war can all contribute to malnutrition and starvation, and not just in developing countries. Some health conditions that are related to malnutrition are: Malabsorption Hunger Beriberi Binge eating Deficiency - Vitamin A Deficiency - Vitamin B1 (thiamine) Deficiency - Vitamin B2 (riboflavin) Deficiency - Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) Deficiency - Vitamin B9 (folacin) Deficiency - Vitamin E Deficiency - Vitamin K Eating disorders Kwashiorkor Megaloblastic anemia Pellagra Rickets Scurvy Spina bifida Malnutrition is a significant problem all over the world, especially among children. It is very harmful to children because it affects brain development and other growth. Children who suffer from malnutrition may have lifelong problems.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of malnutrition vary and depend on its cause. General symptoms include fatigue, dizziness, and weight loss. Exams and Tests 
 
 Testing depends on the specific disorder. Most health care providers will do a nutritional assessment and blood work. Treatment 
 
 Treatment usually consists of replacing missing nutrients, treating symptoms as needed, and treating any underlying medical condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause of the malnutrition. Most nutritional deficiencies can be corrected. However, if malnutrition is caused by a medical condition, that illness has to be treated in order to reverse the nutritional deficiency. Possible Complications 
 
 If untreated, malnutrition can lead to mental or physical disability, illness, and possibly death. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Discuss the risk of malnutrition with your provider. Treatment is necessary if you or your child have any changes in the body's ability to function. Contact your provider if these symptoms develop: Fainting Lack of menstruation Lack of growth in children Rapid hair loss Prevention 
 
 Eating a well-balanced diet helps to prevent most forms of malnutrition. Alternative Names 
 
 Nutrition - inadequate Images 
 
 
 myPlate 
 References 
 
 Alderman H, Shekar M. Nutrition, food security, and health. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme III JW, Schor NF, Behrman RE, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 43. Becker JP, Carney LN, Corkins MR, et al. Consensus statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics/American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: Indicators recommended for the identification and documentation of pediatric malnutrition (undernutrition).  J Acad Nutr Diet . 2014;114(12):1988-2000. Manary MJ, Trehan I. Protein-energy malnutrition. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 215. Read More 
 
 Appetite - increased 
 Beriberi 
 Binge eating disorder 
 Bulimia 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Food guide plate 
 Kwashiorkor 
 Malabsorption 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Pellagra 
 Riboflavin 
 Rickets 
 Scurvy 
 Thiamin 
 Vitamin A 
 Vitamin B6 
 Vitamin E 
 Vitamin K 
 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Malnutrition 
 Browse the Encyclopedia