
 Marfan syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Marfan syndrome is a disorder of connective tissue. This is the tissue that strengthens the body's structures. Disorders of connective tissue affect the skeletal system, cardiovascular system, eyes, and skin. Causes 
 
 Marfan syndrome is caused by defects in a gene called fibrillin-1. Fibrillin-1 plays an important role as the building block for connective tissue in the body. The gene defect also causes the long bones of the body to grow too much. People with this syndrome have tall height and long arms and legs. How this overgrowth happens is not well understood. Other areas of the body that are affected include: Lung tissue (there may be a pneumothorax, in which air can escape from the lung into the chest cavity and collapse the lung) The aorta, the main blood vessel that takes blood from the heart to the body may stretch or become weak (called aortic dilation or aortic aneurysm) The eyes, causing cataracts and other problems (such as a dislocation of the lenses) The skin Tissue covering the spinal cord  In most cases, Marfan syndrome is passed down through families (inherited). However, up to 30% of people have no family history, which is called "sporadic." In sporadic cases, the syndrome is believed to be caused by a new gene change. Symptoms 
 
 People with Marfan syndrome are very often tall with long, thin arms and legs and spider-like fingers (called arachnodactyly). The length of the arms is greater than height when arms are stretched out.  Other symptoms include: A chest that sinks in or sticks out, called funnel chest ( pectus excavatum ) or pigeon breast ( pectus carinatum ) Flat feet Highly arched palate and crowded teeth Hypotonia Joints that are too flexible (but the elbows may be less flexible) Learning disability Movement of the lens of the eye from its normal position (dislocation) Nearsightedness Small lower jaw (micrognathia) Spine that curves to one side ( scoliosis ) Thin, narrow face  Many people with Marfan syndrome suffer from chronic muscle and joint pain. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. The joints may move around more than normal. There may also be signs of: Aneurysm Collapsed lung Heart valve problems  An eye exam may show: Defects of the lens or cornea Retinal detachment Vision problems  The following tests may be performed: Echocardiogram Fibrillin-1 mutation testing (in some people)  An echocardiogram or another test should be done every year to look at the base of the aorta and possibly the heart valves. Treatment 
 
 Vision problems should be treated when possible. Monitor for scoliosis, especially during the teenage years. Medicine to slow the heart rate may help prevent stress on the aorta. To avoid injuring the aorta, people with the condition should avoid participating in contact sports. Some people may need surgery to replace the aortic root and valve. People with Marfan syndrome who have heart valve conditions may need to take antibiotics before dental procedures to prevent endocarditis (infection of the valves). Pregnant women with Marfan syndrome must be monitored very closely because of the increased stress on the heart and aorta. Support Groups 
 
 National Marfan Foundation --  www.marfan.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Heart-related complications may shorten the lifespan of people with this disease. However, many people live into their 60s and beyond. Good care and surgery may further extend lifespan. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Aortic regurgitation Aortic rupture Bacterial endocarditis Dissecting aortic aneurysm Enlargement of the base of the aorta Heart failure Mitral valve prolapse Scoliosis Vision problems  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Couples who have this condition and are planning to have children may want to talk to a genetic counselor before starting a family.  Prevention 
 
 Spontaneous new gene mutations leading to Marfan (less than one third of cases) cannot be prevented. If you have Marfan syndrome, see your provider at least once every year. Alternative Names 
 
 Aortic aneurysm - Marfan Images 
 
 
 Pectus excavatum 
 Marfan syndrome 
 References 
 
 Doyle A, Doyle JJ, Dietz HC. Marfan syndrome. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 702. Pyeritz RE. Inherited diseases of connective tissue. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 260. Read More 
 
 Aortic dissection 
 Aortic insufficiency 
 Aortic valve surgery - open 
 Cardiovascular 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive 
 Mitral valve surgery - open 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Marfan Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia