
 Mathematics disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mathematics disorder is a condition in which a child's math ability is far below normal for their age, intelligence, and education. Causes 
 
 Children who have mathematics disorder have trouble with simple mathematical equations, such as counting and adding. Mathematical disorder may appear with: Developmental coordination disorder Developmental reading disorder Mixed receptive-expressive language disorder Symptoms 
 
 The child may have trouble with math, as well as low scores in math classes and on tests. Problems the child may have are: Trouble with reading, writing, and copying numbers Problems counting and adding numbers, often making simple mistakes Hard time telling the difference between adding and subtracting Problems understanding math symbols and word problems Can't line up numbers properly to add, subtract, or multiply Can't arrange numbers from smallest to largest, or the opposite Can't understand graphs  Exams and Tests 
 
 Standardized tests can assess the child's math ability. Grades and class performance can also help. Treatment 
 
 The best treatment is special (remedial) education. Computer-based programs may also help. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Early intervention improves the chances of a better outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 The child may have problems in school, including behavior problems and loss of self-esteem. Some children with mathematics disorder become anxious or afraid when given math problems, making the problem even worse. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have any concerns about your child's development. Prevention 
 
 Recognizing the problem early is important. Treatment may begin as early as kindergarten or elementary school. Alternative Names 
 
 Developmental dyscalculia References 
 
 Kelly DP, Natale MJ. Neurodevelopmental function and dysfunction in the school-aged child. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 32. Nass R, Sidhu R, Ross G. Autism and other developmental disabilities. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 90. Read More 
 
 Developmental coordination disorder 
 Language disorder - children 
 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, Phd, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Learning Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia