
 McCune-Albright syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 McCune-Albright syndrome is a genetic disease that affects the bones and color (pigmentation) of the skin. Causes 
 
 McCune-Albright syndrome is caused by mutations in the GNAS gene. A small number, but not all, of the person's cells contain this faulty gene (mosaicism). This disease is not inherited.  Symptoms 
 
 The hallmark symptom of McCune-Albright syndrome is early puberty in girls. Menstrual periods may begin in early childhood, long before the breasts or pubic hair develop (which normally occur first). Puberty and menstrual bleeding may begin as early as 4 to 6 months in girls. Early sexual development may also occur in boys, but not as often as in girls. Other symptoms include: Bone fractures Deformities of the bones in the face Gigantism Irregular, large patchy  cafe-au-lait spots , especially on the back  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination may show signs of: Abnormal bone growth in the skull Abnormal heart rhythms ( arrhythmias ) Acromegaly Gigantism
  Large cafe-au-lait spots on the skin Liver disease, jaundice, fatty liver Scar-like tissue in the bone ( fibrous dysplasia )  Tests may show too much: Adrenal  abnormalities Too little parathyroid hormone ( hyperparathyroidism )  Too much thyroid hormone ( hyperthyroidism )  Adrenal hormone  abnormalities Low level of phosphorous in the blood ( hypophosphatemia ) Ovarian cysts Pituitary  or  thyroid tumors Abnormal  blood prolactin  level Abnormal  growth hormone  level Other tests that may be done include: MRI of the head X-rays of the bones
  Genetic testing is available for the GNAS1 gene. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for McCune-Albright syndrome. Drugs that block estrogen production, such as testolactone, have been tried with some success. Adrenal abnormalities (such as  Cushing syndrome ) may be treated with surgery to remove the adrenal glands. Gigantism and pituitary adenoma will need to be treated with medicines that block hormone production, or with surgery. Bone abnormalities (fibrous dysplasia) are sometimes removed with surgery. Limit the number of x-rays taken of affected areas of the body. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Lifespan is relatively normal. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blindness Cosmetic problems from bone abnormalities Deafness Osteitis fibrosa cystica Premature puberty Repeated broken bones Tumors of the bone (rare) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child starts puberty early, or has other symptoms of McCune-Albright syndrome. Genetic counseling, and possibly genetic testing, may be recommended if the disease is diagnosed. Alternative Names 
 
 Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia Images 
 
 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Garibaldi LR, Chemaitilly W. Disorders of pubertal development. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 562. 
Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Birthmarks - pigmented 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Fibrous dysplasia 
 Hearing loss 
 Osteitis fibrosa 
 
 Review Date 8/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics at The University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Endocrine Diseases 
 Growth Disorders 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia