
 Meckel diverticulectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Meckel diverticulectomy is surgery to remove an abnormal pouch on the lining of the small intestine (bowel). This pouch is called a  Meckel diverticulum .  Description 
 
 You will receive  general anesthesia  before surgery. This will make you sleep and unable to feel pain.  If you have open surgery: Your surgeon will make a large surgical cut in your belly to open up the area. Your surgeon will look at the small intestine in the area where the pouch or diverticulum is located. Your surgeon will remove the diverticulum from the wall of your intestine. Sometimes, the surgeon may need to remove a small part of your intestine along with the diverticulum. If this is done, the open ends of your intestine will be sewn or stapled back together. This procedure is called an  anastomosis .  Surgeons can also do this surgery using a laparoscope. The laparoscope is an instrument that looks like a small telescope with a light and a video camera. It is inserted into your belly through a small cut. Video from the camera appears on a monitor in the operating room. This allows the surgeon to view inside your belly during surgery.  In surgery using a laparoscope: Three to five small cuts are made in your belly. The camera and other small tools will be inserted through these cuts. Your surgeon may also make a cut that is 2 to 3 inches (5 to 7.6 cm) long to put a hand through, if needed. Your belly will be filled with gas to allow the surgeon to see the area and perform the surgery with more room to work. The diverticulum is operated on as described above.  Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Treatment is needed to prevent: Bleeding Bowel obstruction  (a blockage in your intestine) Infection Inflammation  The most common symptom of Meckel diverticulum is painless bleeding from the rectum. Your stool may contain fresh blood or look black and tarry. Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general are: Allergic reactions to medicines or  breathing problems Bleeding ,  blood clots , or infection  Risks for this surgery are: Damage to nearby organs in the body. Wound infections or the wound breaks open after surgery. Bulging tissue through the surgical cut. This is called an incisional hernia. The edges of your intestines that are sewn or stapled together (anastomosis) may come open. This may cause life-threatening problems. The area where the intestines are sewn together can scar and create blockage of the intestine. Blockage of the intestine may occur later from  adhesions  caused by the surgery.  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your surgeon: If you are or could be pregnant What medicines you are taking, even medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription  During the days before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it hard for your blood to clot. Some of these are aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), vitamin E, warfarin (Coumadin), and clopidogrel (Plavix). Ask your doctor which drugs you should still take on the day of the surgery. If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your doctor or nurse for help quitting.  On the day of your surgery: Follow your doctor's instructions about when to stop eating and drinking. Take the medicines your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 Most people stay in the hospital for 1 to 7 days depending on how extensive the surgery was. During this time, the doctors and nurses will carefully monitor you.  Treatment may include:  Pain medicines Tube through your nose into your stomach to empty your stomach and relieve nausea and vomiting  You will also be given fluids and nutrition through a vein (IV) until your doctor or nurse feels you are ready to start drinking or eating. This could be as soon as the day after surgery. You will need to follow up with your surgeon in a week or two after surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people who have this surgery have a good outcome. But the results of any surgery depend on your overall health. Talk with your doctor about your expected outcome. Alternative Names 
 
 Meckel diverticulectomy; Meckel diverticulum - surgery; Meckel diverticulum - repair; GI bleeding - Meckel diverticulectomy; Gastrointestinal bleeding - Meckel diverticulectomy Images 
 
 
 Meckel's diverticulectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Harris JW, Evers BM. Small intestine. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery: The Biological Basis of Modern Surgical Practice . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 49. Terhune KP, Tarpley JL. The management of diverticulosis of the small bowel. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:128-132. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Diverticulitis 
 Meckel's diverticulum 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia