
 Meibomianitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Meibomianitis is inflammation of the meibomian glands, a group of oil-releasing (sebaceous) glands in the eyelids. These glands have tiny openings to release oils onto the surface of the cornea. Causes 
 
 Any condition that increases the oily secretions of the meibomian glands will allow excess oils to build up on the edges of the eyelids. This allows for the excess growth of bacteria that are normally present on the skin. These problems can be caused by allergies, hormone changes during adolescence, or skin conditions such as  rosacea  and acne. Meibomianitis is often associated with  blepharitis , which can cause a buildup of a dandruff-like substance at the base of the eyelashes. In some people with meibomianitis, the glands will be plugged so that there is less oil being made for the normal tear film. These people often have symptoms of dry eye.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Swelling and redness of eyelid edges Symptoms of dry eye Slight blurring of vision due to excess oil in tears -- most often cleared by blinking Frequent  styes Exams and Tests 
 
 Meibomianitis can be diagnosed by an eye exam. Special tests are not required. Treatment 
 
 Standard treatment involves: Carefully cleansing the edges of the lids Applying moist heat to the affected eye  These treatments will usually reduce symptoms in most cases. Your health care provider may prescribe an antibiotic ointment to apply to the lid's edge. Other treatments may include: Having an eye doctor perform meibomian gland expression to help clear the glands of secretions. Inserting a small tube (cannula) into each gland opening to wash out thickened oil. Taking tetracycline antibiotics for several weeks. Using LipiFlow, a device that automatically warms the eyelid and helps clear the glands. Taking fish oil to improve the flow of oil from the glands. Using a medicine containing hypochlorous acid, this is sprayed onto the eyelids. This may be particularly useful in people who have rosacea. You may also need treatment for general skin conditions such as acne or rosacea. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Meibomianitis is not a vision-threatening condition. However, it may be a long-term (chronic) and recurring cause of eye irritation. Many people find the treatments frustrating because results are not often immediate. Treatment, however, will often help reduce symptoms. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if treatment does not lead to improvement or if styes develop. Prevention 
 
 Keeping your eyelids clean and treating associated skin conditions will help prevent meibomianitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Meibomian gland dysfunction Images 
 
 
 Eye anatomy 
 References 
 
 Epitropoulos AT. Lid hygiene product helps reduce blepharitis, MGD symptoms.  Opthal Times.  2015.  ophthalmologytimes.modernmedicine.com/ophthalmologytimes/news/lid-hygiene-product-helps-reduce-blepharitis-mgd-symptoms . Accessed September 8, 2016. Foster CS. The eye in skin and mucous membrane disorders. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 5, chap 27. Lane SS, DuBiner HB, Epstein RJ, et al. A new system, the LipiFlow, for the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction.  Cornea.  2012;31(4):396-404. PMID: 22222996  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22222996 . Read More 
 
 Blepharitis 
 Rosacea 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia