
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis is a kidney disorder that involves inflammation and changes to kidney cells. It may lead to  kidney failure . Causes 
 
 Glomerulonephritis  is an inflammation of the glomeruli. The glomeruli of the kidney help filter wastes and fluids from the blood to form urine. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) is a form of glomerulonephritis caused by an abnormal  immune response . Deposits of  antibodies  build up in a part of the kidneys called the glomerular basement membrane. This membrane helps filter wastes and extra fluids from the blood. Damage to this membrane affects the kidney's ability to create urine normally. It may allow blood and protein to leak into the urine. If enough protein leaks into the urine, fluid may leak out of the blood vessels into body tissues, leading to swelling ( edema ). Nitrogen waste products may also build up in the blood ( azotemia ). The 2 forms of this disease are MPGN I and MPGN II. Most people with the disease have type I. MPGN II is much less common. It also tends to get worse faster than MPGN I. Causes of MPGN may include: Autoimmune diseases ( systemic lupus erythematosus ,  scleroderma ,  Sjögren syndrome ,  sarcoidosis Cancer (leukemia, lymphoma) Infections ( hepatitis B ,  hepatitis C ,  endocarditis ,  malaria ) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Blood in the urine Changes in mental status  such as  decreased alertness  or decreased concentration Cloudy urine Dark urine  (smoke, cola, or tea colored) Decrease in urine volume Foamy urine Swelling  of any part of the body Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. The provider may find that you have signs of too much fluid in the body, such as: Swelling, often in the legs Abnormal sounds when listening to your heart and lungs with a stethoscope You may have high blood pressure The following tests help confirm the diagnosis: BUN  and  creatinine  blood test Blood complement levels Urinalysis Urine protein kidney biopsy  (to confirm membranoproliferative GN I or II) Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the symptoms. The goals of treatment are to reduce symptoms, prevent complications, and slow the progression of the disorder. You may need a change in diet. This may include limiting salt, fluids, or protein to help control high blood pressure, swelling, and the buildup of waste products in the blood. Medicines that may be prescribed include: Blood pressure medicines Dipyridamole, with or without aspirin Diuretics Medicines to suppress the immune system, such as cyclophosphamide Steroids Treatment is more effective in children than in adults. Dialysis or  kidney transplant  may eventually be needed to manage kidney failure. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disorder often slowly gets worse and eventually results in  chronic kidney failure .  Half of people with this condition develop chronic kidney failure within 10 years. This is more likely in those who have higher levels of protein in their urine. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result from this disease include: Acute nephritic syndrome Acute renal failure Chronic kidney disease When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if: You have symptoms of this condition Your symptoms get worse or do not go away You develop new symptoms, including decreased urine output Prevention 
 
 Preventing infections such as hepatitis or managing diseases such as lupus may help prevent MPGN. Alternative Names 
 
 Membranoproliferative GN I; Membranoproliferative GN II; Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis; Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; Lobular GN; Glomerulonephritis - membranoproliferative; MPGN type I; MPGN type II Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Schena FP, Alpers CE. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 21. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Antibody 
 BUN - blood test 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Creatinine blood test 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 High blood pressure 
 Immune response 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Renin blood test 
 Swelling 
 Urinalysis 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia