
 Memory loss 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Memory loss (amnesia) is unusual forgetfulness. You may not be able to remember new events, recall one or more memories of the past, or both. The memory loss may be for a short time and then resolve (transient). Or, it may not go away, and, depending on the cause, it can get worse over time. Causes 
 
 Normal aging can cause some forgetfulness. It is normal to have some trouble learning new material or needing more time to remember it. But normal aging does not lead to dramatic memory loss. Such memory loss is due to other diseases.  Memory loss can be caused by many things. To determine a cause, your health care provider will ask if the problem came on suddenly or slowly.  Many areas of the brain help you create and retrieve memories. A problem in any of these areas can lead to memory loss. Memory loss may result from a new injury to the brain, which is caused by or is present after: Brain tumor Cancer treatment, such as  brain radiation ,  bone marrow transplant , or  chemotherapy Concussion or head trauma Not enough oxygen getting to the brain when your heart or breathing is stopped for too long Severe  brain infection  or  infection around brain Major surgery or severe illness, including brain surgery Transient global amnesia (sudden, temporary loss of memory) of unclear cause Transient ischemic attack (TIA)  or  stroke Hydrocephalus (fluid collection in the brain)  Sometimes, memory loss occurs with mental health problems, such as: After a major, traumatic or stressful event Bipolar disorder Depression  or other mental health disorders, such as  schizophrenia Memory loss may be a sign of  dementia . Dementia also affects thinking, language, judgment, and behavior. Other causes of memory loss include: Alcohol or use of prescription or illegal drugs Brain infections such as  Lyme disease , syphilis, or HIV/AIDS Overuse of medicines, such as barbiturates or ( hypnotics ) ECT (electroconvulsive therapy) (most often short-term memory loss) Epilepsy  that is not well controlled Illness that results in the loss of, or damage to brain tissue or nerve cells, such as  Parkinson disease ,  Huntington disease , or  multiple sclerosis Low levels of important nutrients or vitamins, such as low vitamin B1 or  B12 Home Care 
 
 A person with memory loss needs a lot of support. It helps to show the person familiar objects, music, or and photos or play familiar music.  Write down when the person should take any medicine or do other important tasks. It is important to write it down.  If a person needs help with everyday tasks, or if safety or nutrition is a concern, you may want to consider extended-care facilities, such as a nursing home. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the person's medical history and symptoms. This will usually include asking questions of family members and friends. For this reason, they should come to the appointment. Medical history questions may include: Type of memory loss, such as short-term or long-term Time pattern, such as how long the memory loss has lasted or whether it comes and goes Things that triggered memory loss, such as head injury or surgery  Tests that may be done include: Blood tests for specific diseases that are suspected (such as low vitamin B12 or thyroid disease) Cerebral angiography Cognitive tests  (neuropsychological/psychometric tests) CT scan or  MRI of the head EEG Lumbar puncture Treatment depends on the cause of memory loss. Alternative Names 
 
 Forgetfulness; Amnesia; Impaired memory; Loss of memory; Amnestic syndrome; Dementia - memory loss; Mild cognitive impairment - memory loss Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Kirshner HS, Ally B. Intellectual and memory impairments. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 7. Oyebode F. Disturbance of memory. In: Oyebode F, ed.  Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 5. 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Memory 
 Browse the Encyclopedia