
 Mercury 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article discusses poisoning from mercury. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 There are 3 different forms of mercury that cause health problems. They are: Elemental mercury, also known as liquid mercury or quicksilver Inorganic mercury salts Organic mercury  Where Found 
 
 Elemental mercury can be found in: Glass thermometers Electrical switches Fluorescent light bulbs Dental fillings Some medical equipment  Inorganic mercury can be found in: Batteries Chemistry labs Some disinfectants Folk remedies Red cinnabar mineral  Organic mercury can be found in: Older germ-killers (antiseptics) such as red mercurochrome (merbromin) (this substance is now banned by the FDA) Fumes from burning coal Fish that have eaten a form of organic mercury called  methylmercury There may be other sources of these forms of mercury. Symptoms 
 
 ELEMENTAL MERCURY Elemental mercury is usually harmless if it is touched or swallowed. It is so thick and slippery that it usually falls off the skin or leaves the stomach and intestines without being absorbed. A lot of damage can occur, though, if elemental mercury gets into the air in the form of small droplets that are breathed into the lungs. This often occurs by mistake when people try to vacuum up mercury that has spilled onto the ground. Breathing in enough elemental mercury will cause symptoms right away. These are called acute symptoms. Long-term symptoms will occur if small amounts are inhaled over time. These are called chronic symptoms. Chronic symptoms may include: Metallic taste  in the mouth Vomiting Difficulty breathing Bad cough Swollen, bleeding gums Depending on how much mercury is inhaled, permanent lung damage and death may occur. Long-term brain damage from inhaled elemental mercury can also occur. INORGANIC MERCURY Unlike elemental mercury, inorganic mercury is usually poisonous when swallowed. Depending on how much is swallowed, symptoms may include: Burning in the stomach and throat Bloody diarrhea and vomiting If inorganic mercury enters your bloodstream, it can attack the kidneys and brain. Permanent kidney damage and kidney failure may occur. A large amount in the bloodstream may cause massive blood and fluid loss from diarrhea and kidney failure, leading to death. ORGANIC MERCURY Organic mercury can cause sickness if it is breathed in, eaten, or placed on the skin over a long periods of time. Usually, organic mercury causes problems over years or decades, not right away. This means that being exposed to small amounts of organic mercury every day for years will likely cause symptoms to appear later. But, a single large exposure can also cause problems. Long-term exposure will likely cause symptoms in the nervous system, including:  Numbness or pain in certain parts of your skin Uncontrollable shaking or tremor Inability to walk well Blindness and double vision Memory problems Seizures and death (with large exposures)  Being exposed to large amounts of the organic mercury called methylmercury while pregnant may cause permanent brain damage in the baby. Most health care providers recommend eating less fish, especially swordfish, while pregnant. Women should talk to their provider about what they should and should not eat while pregnant. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake and alert?) Source of the mercury Time it was swallowed, inhaled, or touched Amount swallowed, inhaled, or touched DO NOT delay calling for help if you do not know the above information. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 General treatment for mercury exposure includes the steps just below. Treatment for exposure to different forms of mercury are given after this general information. The person should be moved away from the source of exposure. The provider will measure and monitor the person’s vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Treatment may include: Activated charcoal by mouth or tube through the nose into the stomach, if mercury is swallowed Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray Dialysis (kidney machine) EKG (electrocardiogram) or heart tracing Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms The type of exposure will determine what other tests and treatments are needed. ELEMENTAL MERCURY Inhaled elemental mercury poisoning may be difficult to treat. The person may receive: Humidified oxygen or air Breathing tube into the lungs Suctioning of mercury out of the lungs Medicine to remove mercury and heavy metals from the body INORGANIC MERCURY For inorganic mercury poisoning, treatment often begins with supportive care. The person may receive: Fluids by IV (into a vein) Medicines to treat symptoms Activated charcoal, a medicine that soaks up many substances from the stomach Medicines called chelators to remove mercury from the blood ORGANIC MERCURY Treatment for exposure to organic mercury usually consists of medicines called chelators. These remove mercury from the blood and move it away from the brain and kidneys. Often, these medicines will have to be used for weeks to months. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Breathing in a small amount of elemental mercury will cause very few, if any, long-term side effects. However, breathing in larger amounts can lead to a long hospital stay. Permanent lung damage is likely. There may be brain damage. Very large exposures will likely cause death. A large overdose of inorganic mercury may cause massive blood and fluid loss, kidney failure, and likely death. Chronic brain damage from organic mercury poisoning is difficult to treat. Some people never recover, but there has been some success in people who receive chelation treatment. References 
 
 Baum CR. Mercury: Heavy metals and inorganic agents. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 71. Bird TD. Dementia. In: Fauci AS, Harrison TR, eds.  Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine . 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2008:chap 365. Rusyniak DE, Arroyo A, Froberg B, Furbee B. Heavy metals. In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA, Kochanek PM, Fink MP, eds.  Textbook of Critical Care . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 178. Velez LI, O'Connell EJ. Heavy metals. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 157. Young-Jin S. Mercury. In: Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al, eds.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006:chap 96. 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mercury 
 Browse the Encyclopedia