
 Mesenteric angiography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mesenteric angiography is a test used took look at the blood vessels that supply the small and large intestines. Angiography is an imaging test that uses x-rays and a special dye to see inside the arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test uses x-rays and a special dye called contrast to make blood vessels show up on the images. This test is most often done in the radiology area in a hospital. You will lie on an x-ray table. You may ask for medicine to help you relax (sedative) if you need it.  During the test, you will be hooked up to various devices that monitor your blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing. The health care provider will shave and clean the groin area over an artery. A numbing medicine (anesthetic) is injected into the skin over an artery and a needle is inserted into an artery. A thin flexible tube called a catheter is passed through the needle. It is moved into the artery, and up through the main vessels of the belly area until it is properly placed into a mesenteric artery. The doctor uses x-rays as a guide. The doctor can see live images of the area on a TV-like monitor. Contrast dye is injected through this tube to see if there are any problems with the blood vessels. X-ray images are taken of the artery.  Certain treatments can be done during this procedure. These items are passed through the catheter to the area in the artery that needs treatment. These include: Dissolving a blood clot with medicine Opening a partially blocked artery with a balloon Placing a small tube called a stent into an artery to help hold it open  After the x-rays or treatments are finished, the catheter is removed. Pressure is applied to the puncture site for 20 to 45 minutes to stop the bleeding. After that time the area is checked and a tight bandage is applied. The leg is most often kept straight for another 6 hours after the procedure. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink anything for 6 to 8 hours before the test. You will be asked to wear a hospital gown and sign a consent form for the procedure. Remove jewelry from the area being imaged. Tell your provider: If you are pregnant If you have ever had any allergic reactions to x-ray contrast material or iodine substances If you are allergic to any medicines Which medicines you are taking (including any herbal preparations) If you have ever had any bleeding problems  How the Test Will Feel 
 
 The x-ray table is hard and cold. You may ask for a blanket or pillow. You may feel a brief sting when the numbing medicine (anesthetic) is given. You will feel a brief sharp pain and some pressure as the catheter is placed and moved into the artery. In most cases, you will feel only a sensation of pressure in the groin area. As the dye is injected, you will feel a warm, flushing sensation. You may have tenderness and  bruising  at the site of the catheter insertion after the test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done: When there are symptoms of a  narrowed or blocked blood vessel  in the intestines To find the source of bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract To find the cause of ongoing abdominal pain and weight loss when no cause can be identified When other studies do not provide enough information about abnormal growths along the intestinal tract To look at blood vessel damage after an abdominal injury  A mesenteric angiogram may be performed after more sensitive nuclear medicine scans have identified active bleeding. The radiologist can then pinpoint and treat the source. Normal Results 
 
 Results are considered normal if the arteries being examined are normal in appearance. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A common abnormal finding is  narrowing and hardening of the arteries  that supply the large and small intestine. This is called mesenteric ischemia. The problem occurs when fatty material (plaque) builds up on the walls of your arteries. Abnormal results may also be due to  bleeding in the small and large intestine . This may be caused by: Angiodysplasia of the colon Blood vessel rupture from injury  Other abnormal results may be due to: Blood clots Cirrhosis Tumors  Risks 
 
 There is some risk of the catheter damaging the artery or knocking loose a piece of the artery wall. This can reduce or block blood flow and lead to tissue death. This is a rare complication. Other risks include: Allergic reaction to the contrast dye Blood clot that travels to the lungs Damage to the blood vessel where the needle and catheter are inserted Excessive bleeding or a blood clot where the catheter is inserted, which can reduce blood flow to the leg Heart attack or stroke Hematoma, a collection of blood at the site of the needle puncture Infection Injury to the nerves at the needle puncture site Kidney damage from the dye  Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal arteriogram; Arteriogram - abdomen; Mesenteric angiogram Images 
 
 
 Mesenteric arteriography 
 References 
 
 Martin MC, Wyers MC. Mesenteric vascular disease. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston W, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. Read More 
 
 Angiodysplasia of the colon 
 Cirrhosis 
 Endoscopy 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 12/26/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, Assistant Professor of Interventional Radiology & Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cirrhosis 
 Colonic Diseases 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Vascular Diseases 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia