
 Mesenteric venous thrombosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mesenteric venous thrombosis (MVT) is a  blood clot  in one or more of the major veins that drain blood from the intestine. Causes 
 
 MVT is a clot that blocks blood flow in a mesenteric vein. There are two such veins through which blood leaves the intestine. The condition stops the blood circulation of the intestine and can result in damage to the intestine. The exact cause of MVT is unknown. However, there are many diseases that can lead to MVT. Many of the diseases cause swelling (inflammation) of the tissues surrounding the veins, and include: Appendicitis Cancer of the abdomen Diverticulitis Liver disease with  cirrhosis Pancreatitis  People who have disorders that make the blood more likely to stick together (clot) have a higher risk for MVT. Birth control pills and estrogen medicines also increase risk. MVT is more common in men than women. It mainly affects middle aged or older adults. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: 
   Abdominal pain, which may get worse after eating and over time
    
   Bloating
    Diarrhea 
   Fever
    
   Gastrointestinal bleeding
    Vomiting and nausea Exams and Tests 
 
 A  CT scan  is the main test used to diagnose MVT. Other tests may include: Angiogram  (studying the blood flow to the intestine)
    MRI  of the abdomen
    Ultrasound of the abdomen  and mesenteric veins Treatment 
 
 Blood thinners (most commonly heparin or related medicines) are used to treat MVT when there is no associated bleeding. In some cases, medicine can be delivered directly into the clot to dissolve it. This procedure is called thrombolysis. Less often, the clot is removed with a type of surgery called thrombectomy. If there are signs and symptoms of a severe infection called  peritonitis , surgery to remove the intestine is done. After surgery, an  ileostomy  (opening from the small intestine into a bag on the skin) or  colostomy  (an opening from the colon into the skin) may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook depends on the cause of the thrombosis and any damage to the intestine. Getting treatment for the cause before the intestine has died can result in a good recovery. Possible Complications 
 
 Intestinal ischemia  is a serious complication of MVT. Some or the entire intestine dies because of poor blood supply. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have severe or repeated episodes of abdominal pain. Alternative Names 
 
 MVT References 
 
 Acosta S, Björck M. Mesentric vascular disease. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 154. Brandt LJ, Feuerstadt P. Intestinal ischemia. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fortran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Blood clots 
 Cirrhosis 
 Diverticulitis 
 Small intestinal ischemia and infarction 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Deep Vein Thrombosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia