
 Micrognathia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Micrognathia is a term for a lower jaw that is smaller than normal. Considerations 
 
 In some cases, the jaw is small enough to interfere with the infant's feeding. Infants with this condition may need special nipples in order to feed properly. Micrognathia often corrects itself during growth. The jaw may grow a lot during puberty. The problem can be caused by certain inherited disorders and syndromes. Micrognathia can cause the teeth not to align properly. This can be seen in the way the teeth close. Often there will not be enough room for the teeth to grow. Children with this problem should see an orthodontist when the adult teeth come in. Because children may outgrow the condition, it often makes sense to delay treatment until a child is older. Causes 
 
 Micrognathia may be part of other genetic syndromes, including: Cri du chat syndrome Hallerman-Streiff syndrome Marfan syndrome Pierre Robin syndrome Progeria Russell-Silver syndrome Seckel syndrome Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome Treacher-Collins syndrome Trisomy 13 Trisomy 18 XO syndrome ( Turner syndrome )  Home Care 
 
 You may need to use special feeding methods for a child with this condition. Most hospitals have programs where you can learn about these methods. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Contact your health care provider if: Your child seems to have a very small jaw Your child has trouble feeding properly What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam and may ask questions about the problem. Some of these may include: When did you first notice that the jaw was small? How severe is it? Does the child have trouble eating? What other symptoms are present?  The physical exam will include a thorough check of the mouth. The following tests may be performed: Dental x-rays Skull x-rays Depending on the symptoms, a child may need to be tested for an inherited condition that may be the source of the problem. The child may need surgery or devices to correct tooth position. Images 
 
 
 The face 
 References 
 
 Evens K, Hing AV, Cunningham M. Craniofacial and orthopedic conditions. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 95. 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Jaw Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia