
 Milia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Milia are tiny white bumps or small cysts on the skin. They are almost always seen in newborn babies. Causes 
 
 Milia occur when dead skin becomes trapped in small pockets at the surface of the skin or mouth. They are common in newborn infants. Similar cysts are seen in the mouths of newborn infants. They are called  Epstein's pearls . These cysts also go away on their own. Adults may develop milia on the face. The bumps and cysts also occur on parts of the body that are swollen (inflamed) or injured. Rough sheets or clothing may irritate the skin and mild reddening around the bump. The middle of the bump will stay white. Irritated milia are sometimes called "baby acne." This is incorrect since milia are not a true from of acne. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Whitish, pearly bump in the skin of newborns Bumps that appear across the cheeks, nose, and chin Whitish, pearly bump on gums or roof of mouth (they may look like teeth coming through the gums)  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can often diagnose milia just by looking at the skin or mouth. No testing is needed. Treatment 
 
 In children, no treatment is needed. Skin changes on the face or cysts in the mouth often go away after the first few weeks of life without treatment. There are no lasting effects. Adults may have milia removed to improve their appearance. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. References 
 
 Morelli JG. Diseases of the neonate. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 639. 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Common Infant and Newborn Problems 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia