
 Mittelschmerz 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mittelschmerz is one-sided, lower abdominal pain that affects some women. It occurs at or around the time of an egg is released from the ovaries (ovulation). Causes 
 
 1 in 5 women have pain around the time of ovulation. This is called mittelschmerz. The pain may occur just before, during, or after ovulation. This pain can be explained in several ways. Just before the ovulation, the growth of the follicle where the egg develops may stretch the surface of the ovary. This can cause pain. At the time of ovulation, fluid or blood is released from the ruptured egg follicle. This may irritate lining of the abdomen. Symptoms 
 
 Mittelschmerz may be felt on one side of the body during one month and then switch to the other side during the next month. It may also occur on the same side for many months in a row. Symptoms include lower-abdominal pain that: Occurs only on one side Goes on for minutes to a few hours. It can last up to 24 to 48 hours. Feels like a sharp, cramping pain unlike other pain Severe (rare) May switch sides from month to month Begins midway through the menstrual cycle  Exams and Tests 
 
 A pelvic exam shows no problems. Other tests (such as an abdominal ultrasound or transvaginal pelvic ultrasound) may be done to look for other causes of ovarian or pelvic pain. These tests may be done if the pain is ongoing. Treatment 
 
 Most of the time treatment is not needed. Pain relievers may be needed if the pain is intense or lasts a long time. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Mittelschmerz can be painful, but it is not harmful. It is not a sign of disease. It may help women to be aware of the time in the menstrual cycle when the egg is released. It is important for you to discuss any pain you are having with your health care provider. There are other conditions that can cause similar pain that are much more serious and require treatment.  Possible Complications 
 
 Most of the time there are no complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: Ovulation pain seems to change. Pain lasts longer than usual. Pain occurs with vaginal bleeding. Prevention 
 
 Birth control pills can be taken to prevent ovulation. This can help reduce pain that is linked to ovulation. Alternative Names 
 
 Ovulation pain; Midcycle pain Images 
 
 
 Female reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Kelerman RD. Women's health. In: Kellerman RD, ed.  Conn's Current Therapy 2015 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 17. Won HR, Abbott J. Optimal management of chronic cyclical pelvic pain: an evidence-based and pragmatic approach.  Int J Women's Health . 2010;2:263-77. PMID: 21151732  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21151732 .  
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Menstruation 
 Pelvic Pain 
 Browse the Encyclopedia