
 Molluscum contagiosum 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Molluscum contagiosum is a viral skin infection that causes raised, pearl-like  papules  or  nodules  on the skin. Causes 
 
 Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a virus that is a member of the poxvirus family. You can get the infection in different ways. This is a common infection in children and occurs when a child comes into direct contact with a lesion or an object that has the virus on it. The infection is most often seen on the face, neck, armpit, arms, and hands. But it may occur anywhere on the body, except the palms and soles. The virus can spread through contact with contaminated objects, such as towels, clothing, or toys. The virus also spreads by sexual contact. Early lesions on the genitals may be mistaken for herpes or warts. But unlike herpes, these lesions are painless. Persons with a weakened immune system (due to conditions such as HIV/ AIDS ) may have a rapidly spreading case of molluscum contagiosum. Symptoms 
 
 The infection on the skin begins as a small, painless papule. It may become raised to a pearly, flesh-colored nodule. The papule often has a dimple in the center. Scratching or other irritation causes the virus to spread in a line or in groups, called crops. The papules are about 2 to 5 millimeters wide. Usually, there is no inflammation (swelling and redness) and no redness unless you have been digging or scratching at the lesions (abnormal areas on the skin). The skin lesion commonly has a central core or plug of white, cheesy or waxy material. In adults, the lesions are commonly seen on the genitals, abdomen, and inner thigh. Exams and Tests 
 
 Diagnosis is based on the appearance of the lesion and can be confirmed by a  skin biopsy . The health care provider will examine the lesion to rule out other disorders and to determine other underlying disorders. Treatment 
 
 In people with a healthy immune system, the disorder usually goes away on its own over months to years. But the lesions can spread before they go away. Individual lesions may be removed surgically. This is done by scraping, de-coring, freezing, or through needle electrosurgery. Laser treatment may also be used. Surgical removal of individual lesions may result in scarring. Medicines, such as salicylic acid preparations used to remove  warts , may be helpful. But these medicines can cause blistering that leads to temporary skin discoloration. Cantharidin, commonly called beetle juice, is the most common solution used to treat the lesions in the provider's office. Tretinoin cream or imiquimod cream may also be prescribed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Molluscum contagiosum lesions may persist from a few months to a few years. They eventually disappear without scarring, unless there has been excessive scratching, which may leave marks. The lesions usually all disappear within 6 to 18 months. The disorder may persist in  immunosuppressed  people. Possible Complications 
 
 Problems that can occur include any of the following: Persistence, spread, or recurrence of lesions
   Secondary bacterial skin infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if: You have a skin problem that looks like molluscum contagiosum Molluscum contagiosum lesions persist or spread, or if new symptoms appear 
 Prevention 
 
 Avoid direct contact with the skin lesions. Do not share towels or other personal items, such as razors and make-up, with other people. Avoiding sex can also prevent getting the molluscum virus and other STDs. You can also avoid STDs by having a monogamous sexual relationship with a partner known to be disease-free. Male and female condoms can't fully protect you, as the virus can be on areas not covered by the condom. Even so, condoms should still be used every time the disease status of a sexual partner is unknown. Condoms reduce your chances of getting or spreading STDs. Images 
 
 
 Molluscum contagiosum - close-up 
 Molluscum contagiosum - close-up of the chest 
 Molluscum on the chest 
 Molluscum, microscopic appearance 
 Molluscum contagiosum on the face 
 References 
 
 

Damon IK. Other poxviruses that infect humans. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 136. Javed A, Coulson I. Molluscum contagiosum. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 149. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Papule 
 Skin nodules 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Skin Infections 
 Viral Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia