
 Morton neuroma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Morton neuroma is an injury to the nerve between the toes, which causes thickening and pain. It commonly affects the nerve that travels between the third and fourth toes. Causes 
 
 The exact cause is unknown. Doctors believe the following may play a role in the development of this condition: Wearing tight shoes and high heels Abnormal positioning of toes Flat feet Forefoot problems, including  bunions  and  hammer toes High foot arches Morton neuroma is more common in women than in men. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Tingling in the space between the third and fourth toes Toe cramping Sharp, shooting, or burning pain in the ball of the foot and sometimes toes Pain that increases when wearing shoes or pressing on the area Pain that gets worse over time  In rare cases, nerve pain occurs in the space between the second and third toes. This is not a common form of Morton neuroma, but treatment is similar. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can usually diagnose this problem by examining your foot. A foot x-ray may be done to rule out bone problems. MRI or ultrasound can successfully diagnose the condition. Nerve testing ( electromyography ) cannot diagnose Morton neuroma. But it may be used to rule out conditions that cause similar symptoms. Blood tests may be done to check for inflammation-related conditions, including certain forms of arthritis. Treatment 
 
 Nonsurgical treatment is tried first. Your doctor may recommend any of the following: Padding and taping the toe area Shoe inserts Changes to footwear, such as wearing shoes with wider toe boxes or flat heels Anti-inflammatory medicines taken by mouth or injected into the toe area Nerve blocking medicines injected into the toe area Other painkillers Physical therapy  Anti-inflammatories and painkillers are not recommended for long-term treatment. In some cases, surgery is needed to remove the thickened tissue and inflamed nerve. This helps relieve pain and improve foot function. Numbness after surgery is permanent. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Nonsurgical treatment does not always improve symptoms. Surgery to remove the thickened tissue is successful in most cases. Possible Complications 
 
 Morton neuroma can make walking difficult. Persons with this foot condition may also have trouble with activities that put pressure on the foot, such as pressing the gas pedal while driving. It may hurt to wear certain types of shoes, such as high-heels. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have persistent pain or tingling in your foot or toe area. Prevention 
 
 Avoid ill-fitting shoes. Wear shoes with a wide toe box or flat heels. Alternative Names 
 
 Morton neuralgia; Morton toe syndrome; Morton entrapment; Metatarsal neuralgia; Plantar neuralgia; Intermetatarsal neuralgia; Interdigital neuroma; Interdigital plantar neuroma References 
 
 Lee SM, Scardina RJ. Morton neuroma. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 91. McGee DL. Podiatric procedures. In: Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds.  Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Foot pain 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dennis Ogiela, MD, Orthopedic Surgery and  Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT.  Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foot Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia