
 Mouthwash overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Mouthwash overdose occurs when someone uses more than the normal or recommended amount of this substance. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The ingredients in mouthwash that can be harmful in large amounts are: Chlorhexidine gluconate Ethanol (ethyl alcohol) Hydrogen peroxide Methyl salicylate Where Found 
 
 Many brands of mouthwash contain the ingredients listed above. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a mouthwash  overdose  include: Abdominal pain Burns and damage to the clear covering of the front of the eye (if it gets in the eye) Coma Diarrhea Dizziness Drowsiness Headache Low body temperature Low blood pressure Low blood sugar Nausea Rapid heart rate Rapid, shallow breathing Skin redness and pain Slowed breathing Slurred speech Throat pain Uncoordinated movement Unconsciousness Unresponsive reflexes Urination problems (too much or too little urine) Vomiting (may contain blood) Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Kidney dialysis (in serious cases) Laxative Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) The person may be admitted to the hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on the amount of mouthwash they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Drinking large amounts of mouthwash may cause symptoms similar to drinking large amounts of alcohol (drunkenness). Swallowing large amounts of methyl salicylate and hydrogen peroxide may also cause serious stomach and intestine symptoms. It can also lead to changes in the body's acid-base balance. Alternative Names 
 
 Listerine overdose; Antiseptic mouth rinse overdose References 
 
 Finnell JT. Alcohol-related disease. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 185. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 10/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia