
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uncoordinated movement is due to a muscle control problem that causes an inability to coordinate movements. It leads to a jerky, unsteady, to-and-fro motion of the middle of the body (trunk) and an  unsteady gait  (walking style). It can also affect the limbs. The medical name of this condition is ataxia. Considerations 
 
 Smooth graceful movement requires a balance between different muscle groups. A part of the brain called the cerebellum manages this balance. Causes 
 
 Diseases that damage the cerebellum, spinal cord, or  peripheral  nerves can interfere with normal muscle movement. The result is large, jerky, uncoordinated movements. Brain injuries or diseases that can cause uncoordinated movements include: Brain injury or head trauma Chickenpox  or certain other brain infections ( encephalitis ) Conditions that are passed through families (such as congenital cerebellar ataxia,  Friedreich ataxia ,  ataxia - telangiectasia , or  Wilson disease ) 
  Multiple sclerosis Stroke  or  transient ischemic attack  (TIA) Poisoning or toxic effects caused by: Alcohol Certain medicines Heavy metals such as mercury, thallium, and lead Solvents such as toluene or carbon tetrachloride  Other causes include: Certain cancers, in which uncoordinated movement symptoms may appear months or years before the cancer is diagnosed (called paraneoplastic syndrome) Problems with the nerves in the legs (neuropathy) Spine injury or disease causing damage to the spinal cord (such as compression fractures of the spine)  Home Care 
 
 A home safety evaluation by a physical therapist may be helpful. Take steps to make it easier and safer to move around at home. For example, get rid of clutter, leave wide walkways, and remove throw rugs or other objects that might cause slipping or falling. People with this condition should be encouraged to take part in normal activities. Family members need to be patient with a person who has poor coordination. Take time to show the person ways to do tasks more easily. Take advantage of the person's strengths while avoiding his or her weaknesses. Ask the health care provider whether walking aids, such as a cane or walker, would be helpful. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: A person has unexplained problems with coordination Lack of coordination lasts longer than a few minutes What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 In an emergency, the patient will first be stabilized so that symptoms do not get worse. The health care provider will perform a physical exam, which may include: A detailed examination of the nervous system and muscles, paying careful attention to walking, balance, and coordination of pointing with fingers and toes. The patient will be asked to stand up with the feet together and the eyes closed. This is called the Romberg test. If the patient loses balance, this is a sign that the sense of position has been lost. In this case, the test is considered positive. Medical history questions may include: When did the symptoms begin? Does the uncoordinated movement happen all the time or does it come and go? Is it getting worse? What medicines do you take? Do you drink alcohol? Do you use recreational drugs? Have you been exposed to something that may have caused poisoning? What other symptoms do you have? For example:  weakness  or  paralysis ,  numbness , tingling, or loss of sensation,  confusion  or disorientation,  seizures . Tests that may be ordered include: Antibody testing to check for paraneoplastic syndromes Blood tests (such as a  CBC  or  blood differential ) CT scan of the head Genetic testing MRI of the head You may need to be referred to a specialist for diagnosis and treatment. If a specific problem is causing the ataxia, the problem will be treated. For example, if a medicine is causing coordination problems, the medicine may be changed or stopped. Other causes may not be treatable. The health care provider can tell you more. Alternative Names 
 
 Lack of coordination; Loss of coordination; Coordination impairment; Ataxia; Clumsiness; Uncoordinated movement Images 
 
 
 Muscular atrophy 
 References 
 
 Lang AE. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 410. Subramony SH. Ataxic disorders and cerebellar disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 22. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Chickenpox 
 Encephalitis 
 Head injury - first aid 
 Peripheral 
 Toxins 
 Walking abnormalities 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia