
 Movement - unpredictable or jerky 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Jerky body movement is a condition in which a person makes fast movements that they cannot control and that have no purpose. These movements interrupt the person's normal movement or posture. The medical name of this condition is chorea. Considerations 
 
 This condition can affect one or both sides of the body. Typical movements of chorea include: Bending and straightening the fingers and toes Grimacing in the face Raising and lowering the shoulders These movements do not usually repeat. They can look like they are being done on purpose. But the movements are not under the person's control. A person with chorea may look jittery or restless. Causes 
 
 There are many possible causes of unpredictable, jerky movements, including: Anti-cardiolipin antibody syndrome Benign hereditary chorea (a rare inherited condition) Disorders of calcium, glucose, or sodium metabolism Huntington disease Medicines (such as levodopa, antidepressants, anticonvulsants) Polycythemia rubra vera Sydenham chorea Wilson disease Pregnancy (chorea gravidarum) Stroke Systemic lupus erythematosus Tardive dyskinesia  (a condition that can be caused by medicines such as antipsychotic drugs) Thyroid disease Other rare disorders  Home Care 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the cause of the movements. If the movements are due to a medicine, the medicine should be stopped, if possible. If the movements are due to a disease, the disorder should be treated. For people with Huntington disease, if the movements are severe and affect the person's life, medicines such as  tetrabenazine may help control them. Excitement and fatigue can make chorea worse. Rest helps improve chorea. Try to reduce emotional stress. Safety measures should also be taken to prevent injury from the involuntary movements. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have unexplained body motions that are unpredictable and do not go away. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. This may include a detailed examination of the nervous and muscle systems. The doctor will ask about your medical history and symptoms, including: What kind of movement occurs? What part of the body is affected? What other symptoms are there? Is there irritability? Is there  weakness  or  paralysis ? Is there  restlessness ? Are there emotional problems? Are there  facial tics ? Tests that may be ordered include: Blood tests such as  metabolic panel ,  complete blood count  (CBC),  blood differential CT scan of the head  or affected area EEG  (in rare cases) EMG  and  nerve conduction velocity  (in rare cases) Genetic studies Lumbar puncture MRI of the head  or affected area Urinalysis Treatment is based on the type of chorea the person has. If medicines are used, the health care provider will decide which medicine to prescribe based on the person's symptoms and test results. Alternative Names 
 
 Chorea; Muscle - jerky movements (uncontrolled); Hyperkinetic movements References 
 
 Jankovic J, Lang AE. Movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Lang AE. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 410. 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia