
 Movement - uncontrollable 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uncontrollable movements include many types of movements that you cannot control. They can affect the arms, legs, face, neck, or other parts of the body. Examples of uncontrollable movements are: Loss of muscle tone (flaccidity) Slow, twisting, or continued movements (chorea, athetosis, or dystonia) Sudden jerking movements (myoclonus, ballismus) Uncontrollable repetitive movements (asterixis or tremor)  Causes 
 
 There are many causes of uncontrolled movements. Some movements last only a short time. Others are due to a permanent condition of the brain and spinal cord and may get worse. Some of these movements affect children. Others affect only adults. Causes in children: Genetic disorder Kernicterus  (too much  bilirubin  in the  central nervous system ) Lack of oxygen ( hypoxia ) at birth  Causes in adults: Nervous system diseases that are getting worse Genetic disorder Medicines Stroke or brain injury Tumors  Home Care 
 
 Physical therapy that includes swimming, stretching, walking, and balancing exercises can help with coordination and slow the damage. Family support is important. It helps to openly discuss your feelings. Self-help groups are available in many communities. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any unexplained movements that you cannot control that do not go away. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history. You will have a detailed examination of both the nervous and muscle systems. Medical history questions may include: Are there  muscle contractions  that may be causing the abnormal posture? Are the arms affected? Are the legs affected? When did this movement begin? Did it occur suddenly? Has it been getting worse slowly over weeks or months? Is it present all the time? Is it worse after exercise? Is it worse when you are stressed? Is it better after sleep? What makes it better? What other symptoms are present?  Tests that may be ordered include: Blood tests (such as  CBC  or  blood differential ) CT scan  of the head or affected area EEG Lumbar puncture MRI of the head  or affected area Urinalysis Treatment depends on the cause. Many uncontrollable movements are treated with medicines. Some symptoms may improve on their own. Your provider will make recommendations based on your signs and symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Uncontrolled movements; Involuntary body movements; Body movements - uncontrollable; Dyskinesia; Athetosis; Myoclonus; Ballismus Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Jankovic J, Lang AE. Movement disorders: diagnosis and assessment. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Lang AE. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 410. 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia