
 Multiple system atrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a rare condition that causes symptoms similar to  Parkinson disease . However, people with MSA have more widespread damage to the part of the nervous system that controls important functions such as heart rate, blood pressure, and sweating. Causes 
 
 The cause is unknown. MSA develops gradually and is most often diagnosed in men older than 60. Symptoms 
 
 MSA damages the nervous system. Symptoms may include: Face changes, such as a masklike appearance to the face and staring Difficulty chewing or swallowing (occasionally), not able to close the mouth Disrupted sleep patterns (especially during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep late at night) Dizziness  or  fainting  when standing up or after standing still Frequent falls Erection problems Loss of control over bowels or bladder Problems with activity that requires small movements (loss of fine motor skills), such as writing that is small and hard to read Loss of sweating in any part of the body Mild decline in mental function Movement difficulties , such as  loss of balance ,  shuffling when walking Muscle aches  and pains (myalgia), and  stiffness Nausea and problems with digestion Posture problems, such as unstable, stooped, or slumped over Slow movements Tremors Vision changes, decreased or  blurred vision Voice and speech changes  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Confusion Dementia Depression Sleep-related breathing difficulties, especially  sleep apnea  or a blockage in the air passage that leads to a harsh vibrating sound  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you, and check your eyes, nerves, and muscles.  Your blood pressure will be taken while you are lying down and standing up.  There are no specific tests to confirm this disease. A doctor who specializes in the nervous system (neurologist) can make the diagnosis based on: History of symptoms Physical examination results Ruling out other causes of symptoms  Testing to help confirm the diagnosis may include: MRI of head Plasma  norepinephrine  levels Urine examination for norepinephrine breakdown products ( urine catecholamines )  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for MSA. There is no known way to prevent the disease from getting worse. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms. Anticholinergic medicines, such as levodopa or carbidopa, may be used to reduce early or mild tremors.  But, for many people with MSA these medicines do not work well.  Medicines may be used to treat low blood pressure. A pacemaker that is programmed to stimulate the heart to beat at a rapid rate (faster than 100 beats per minute) may increase blood pressure for some people. Constipation can be treated with a high-fiber diet and laxatives. Medicines are available to treat erection problems.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome for MSA is poor. Loss of mental and physical functions slowly get worse. Early death is likely. People typically live 7 to 9 years after diagnosis. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your doctor if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Call your doctor if you have been diagnosed with MSA and your symptoms return or get worse. Also call if new symptoms appear, including possible side effects of medicines, such as: Changes in alertness/behavior/mood Delusional behavior Dizziness Hallucinations Involuntary movements Loss of mental functioning Nausea or vomiting Severe confusion or disorientation  If you have a family member with MSA and their condition declines to the point that you are unable to care for the person at home, seek advice from your family member's doctor. Alternative Names 
 
 Shy-Drager syndrome; Neurologic orthostatic hypotension; Shy-McGee-Drager syndrome; Parkinson plus syndrome; MSA-P; MSA-C Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Jankovic J. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 71. Ubhi K, Low, P, Masliah E. Multiple system atrophy: a clinical and neuropathological perspective.  Trends Neurosci . 2011:34;581-590. PMID: 21962754  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21962754 . Read More 
 
 Parkinson disease 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, M.D., Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Autonomic Nervous System Disorders 
 Degenerative Nerve Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia