
 Muscle disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A muscle disorder includes patterns of weakness, electromyogram (EMG) findings, or biopsy results that suggest a muscle problem. The muscle disorder can be inherited, such as  muscular dystrophy , or acquired, such as alcoholic myopathy. The medical name for muscle disorder is myopathy. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is weakness. Other symptoms include cramps and stiffness. Exams and Tests 
 
 

Blood tests sometimes show abnormally high muscle enzymes. If a muscle disorder might also affect other family members, genetic testing may be done. When someone has symptoms and signs of a muscle disorder, tests such as an  electromyogram ,  muscle biopsy , or both can confirm whether it is a myopathy. A muscle biopsy examines a tissue sample under a microscope to confirm disease. Sometimes, a blood test to check for a genetic disorder is all that is needed based on someone’s symptoms and family history. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause. It usually includes:  Bracing Medication Physical therapy Preventing the condition from getting worse by treating the underlying condition causing the muscle weakness Surgery (sometimes) Your health care provider can tell you more about your condition and treatment options. Alternative Names 
 
 Myopathic changes; Myopathy; Muscle problem Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 

Borg K, Ensrud E. Myopathies. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 135. Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 421. 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia