
 Muscular dystrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Muscular dystrophy is a group of inherited disorders that cause  muscle weakness  and loss of muscle tissue, which get worse over time. Causes 
 
 Muscular dystrophies, or MD, are a group of inherited conditions. This means they are passed down through families. They may occur in childhood or adulthood. There are many different types of muscular dystrophy. They include: Becker muscular dystrophy Duchenne muscular dystrophy Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy  Symptoms 
 
 Muscular dystrophy can affect adults, but the more severe forms tend to occur in early childhood. Symptoms vary among the different types of muscular dystrophy. All of the muscles may be affected. Or, only specific groups of muscles may be affected, such as those around the pelvis, shoulder, or face. The muscle weakness slowly gets worse and symptoms can include: Delayed development of muscle motor skills Difficulty using 1 or more muscle groups Drooling Eyelid drooping  ( ptosis )  Frequent falls Loss of strength in a muscle or group of muscles as an adult Loss in muscle size Problems walking  (delayed walking) Intellectual disability is present in some types of muscular dystrophy. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination and your medical history will help the doctor determine the type of muscular dystrophy. Specific muscle groups are affected by different types of muscular dystrophy. The doctor's exam may show: 
  Abnormally curved spine ( scoliosis )
   
  Joint contractures ( clubfoot , clawhand, or others)
   
  Low muscle tone ( hypotonia )
   Some types of muscular dystrophy involve the heart muscle, causing  cardiomyopathy  or abnormal heart rhythm ( arrhythmia ). Often, there is a loss of muscle mass ( wasting ). This may be hard to see because some types of muscular dystrophy cause a buildup of fat and connective tissue that makes the muscle appear larger. This is called pseudohypertrophy. A  muscle biopsy  may be used to confirm the diagnosis. In some cases, a DNA blood test may be all that is needed. Other tests may include: 
  Heart testing: electrocardiography (ECG)
   
  Nerve testing:  nerve conduction  and electromyography ( EMG )
   
  Urine and blood testing, including  CPK  level
   
  Genetic testing for some forms of muscular dystrophy
   Treatment 
 
 There are no known cures for the various muscular dystrophies. The goal of treatment is to control symptoms. Physical therapy may help maintain muscle strength and function. Leg braces and a wheelchair can improve mobility and self-care. In some cases, surgery on the spine or legs may help improve function. Corticosteroids taken by mouth are sometimes prescribed to children with certain muscular dystrophies to keep them walking for as long as possible. The person should be as active as possible. No activity at all (such as bedrest) can make the disease worse. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The severity of disability depends on the type of muscular dystrophy. All types of muscular dystrophy slowly get worse, but how fast this happens varies widely. Some types of muscular dystrophy, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy in boys, are deadly. Other types cause little disability and people have a normal lifespan. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have symptoms of muscular dystrophy. You have a personal or family history of muscular dystrophy and you are planning to have children. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is advised when there is a family history of muscular dystrophy. Women may have no symptoms, but still carry the gene for the disorder. Duchenne muscular dystrophy can be detected with about 95% accuracy by genetic studies done during pregnancy. Alternative Names 
 
 Inherited myopathy; MD Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Sarnat HB. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 609. Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 421. Read More 
 
 Becker muscular dystrophy 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 
 Genetics 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Myotonia congenita 
 Respiratory 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscular Dystrophy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia