
 Myasthenia gravis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disorder. Neuromuscular disorders involve the muscles and the nerves that control them. Causes 
 
 Myasthenia gravis is a type of  autoimmune disorder . An autoimmune disorder occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. Antibodies are proteins made by the body's immune system when it detects harmful substances. Antibodies may be produced when the immune system mistakenly considers healthy tissue a harmful substance, such as in the case of myasthenia gravis. In people with myasthenia gravis, the body produces  antibodies  that block the muscle cells from receiving messages (neurotransmitters) from the nerve cells. The exact cause of myasthenia gravis is unknown. In some cases, it is linked to tumors of the thymus (an organ of the immune system). Myasthenia gravis can affect people at any age. It is most common in young women and older men. Symptoms 
 
 Myasthenia gravis causes weakness of the voluntary muscles -- muscles that are under your control. Autonomic muscles of the heart and digestive tract are usually not affected. The muscle weakness of myasthenia gravis worsens with activity and improves with rest. This muscle weakness can lead to a variety of symptoms, including:  Breathing difficulty  because of weakness of the chest wall muscles Chewing  or swallowing difficulty, causing frequent gagging,  choking , or  drooling Difficulty climbing stairs, lifting objects, or rising from a seated position Difficulty talking Drooping head and eyelids Facial paralysis  or weakness of the facial muscles Fatigue Hoarseness or changing voice Double vision Difficulty maintaining steady gaze  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This includes a detailed nervous system (neurological) examination. This may show: Muscle weakness, with eye muscles usually affected first Normal reflexes and feeling (sensation)  Tests that may be done include: Acetylcholine receptor antibodies  associated with this disease CT  or  MRI  scan of the chest to look for a tumor Nerve conduction studies EMG Pulmonary function tests Edrophonium test to see if this medicine reverses the symptoms for a short time  Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for myasthenia gravis. Treatment may allow you to have periods without any symptoms (remission). Lifestyle changes can often help you continue your daily activities. The following may be recommended: Resting throughout the day Using an eye patch if double vision is bothersome Avoiding stress and heat exposure, which can make symptoms worse  Medicines that may be prescribed include: Neostigmine or pyridostigmine to improve communication between the nerves and muscles Prednisone and other drugs (such as azathioprine, cyclosporine, or mycophenolate mofetil) to suppress the immune system response if you have severe symptoms and other medicines have not worked well.  Crisis situations are attacks of weakness of the breathing muscles. These attacks can occur without warning when either too much or too little medicine is taken. These attacks usually last no longer than a few weeks. You may need to be admitted to the hospital, where you may need breathing assistance with a  ventilator . A procedure called plasmapheresis may also be used to help end the crisis. This procedure involves removing the clear part of the blood (plasma), which contains the antibodies. This is replaced with donated plasma that is free of antibodies, or with other fluids. Plasmapheresis may also help reduce symptoms for 4 to 6 weeks and is often used before surgery. Another procedure, called intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), may also be done. With this procedure, a large amount of helpful antibodies are given directly into the bloodstream. Surgery to remove the thymus (thymectomy) may result in permanent remission or less need for medicines, especially when there is a tumor present. If you have eye problems, your doctor may suggest lens prisms to improve vision. Surgery may also be recommended to treat your eye muscles. Physical therapy can help maintain your muscle strength. This is especially important for the muscles that support breathing. Some medicines can worsen symptoms and should be avoided. Before taking any medicine, ask your doctor whether it is OK for you to take it. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  myasthenia gravis support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 There is no cure, but long-term remission is possible. You may have to restrict some daily activities. People who have only eye symptoms (ocular myasthenia gravis), may develop generalized myasthenia over time. A woman with myasthenia gravis can get pregnant, but careful prenatal care is important. The baby may be weak and require medications for a few weeks after birth, but usually will not develop the disorder. Possible Complications 
 
 The condition may cause life-threatening breathing problems. This is called a myasthenic crisis. Patients with myasthenia gravis are at higher risk for other autoimmune disorders, such as  thyrotoxicosis ,  rheumatoid arthritis , and  systemic lupus erythematosus  (lupus). When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of myasthenia gravis. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have breathing difficulty or swallowing problems. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuromuscular disorder - myasthenia gravis  Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 Ptosis, drooping of the eyelid 
 References 
 
 Meriggioli MN, Sanders DB. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 78. Mittal MK, Wijdicks EFM. Muscular paralysis. In: Parrillo JE, Dellinger RP, eds.  Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and Management in the Adult . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 64. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Immune response 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 6/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Daniel Kantor, MD, Kantor Neurology, Coconut Creek, FL, and Immediate Past President of the Florida Society of Neurology (FSN). Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Myasthenia Gravis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia