
 Myocarditis - pediatric 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pediatric myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle in an infant or young child. Causes 
 
 Myocarditis is rare in young children. It is slightly more common in older children and adults. It is often worse in newborns and young infants than in children over age 2.  Most cases in children are caused by a virus that reaches the heart. These can include the  influenza (flu)  virus, Coxsackie virus, parovirus, and adenovirus. It may also be caused by bacterial infections such as  Lyme disease . Other causes of pediatric myocarditis include: Allergic reactions to certain medicines Exposure to chemicals in the environment Infections due to fungus or parasites Radiation Some diseases (autoimmune disorders) that cause inflammation throughout the body Some drugs  The heart muscle may be directly damaged by the virus or the bacteria that infect it. The body's immune response can also damage the heart muscle (called the myocardium) in the process of fighting the infection. This can lead to symptoms of heart failure. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may be mild at first and hard to detect. However, in newborns and infants, symptoms may sometimes appear suddenly. Symptoms may include: Anxiousness Failure to thrive  or poor weight gain Feeding difficulties Fever and other symptoms of infection Listlessness Low urine output (a sign of decreasing kidney function) Pale, cool hands and feet (a sign of poor circulation) Rapid breathing Rapid heart rate  Symptoms in children over age 2 may also include: Belly area pain and nausea Chest pain Cough Fatigue Swelling (edema) in the legs, feet, and face  Exams and Tests 
 
 Pediatric myocarditis can be hard to diagnose because the signs and symptoms often mimic those of other heart and lung diseases, or a bad case of the flu. The health care provider may hear a rapid heartbeat or abnormal heart sounds while listening to the child's chest with a stethoscope. A physical exam may detect fluid in the lungs and swelling in the legs in older children. There may be signs of infection, including fever and rashes. A chest x-ray can show enlargement (swelling) of the heart. If the provider suspects myocarditis based on the exam and chest x-ray, an electrocardiogram may also be done to help make the diagnosis. Other tests that may be needed include: Blood cultures to check for infection Blood tests to look for antibodies against viruses or the heart muscle itself Blood tests to check liver and kidney function Complete blood count Heart biopsy (the most accurate way to confirm the diagnosis, but not always needed) Special tests to check for the presence of viruses in the blood (viral PCR)  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for myocarditis. The heart muscle inflammation will often go away on its own.  The goal of treatment is to support heart function until the inflammation goes away. Many children with this condition are admitted to a hospital. Activity often needs to be limited while the heart is inflamed because it can strain the heart. Treatment may include: Antibiotics to fight bacterial infection Anti-inflammatory medicines called steroids to control inflammation Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), a medicine made of substances (called antibodies) that the body produces to fight infection, to control the inflammatory process Mechanical support using a machine to help the heart function (in extreme cases) Medicines to treat symptoms of heart failure Medicines to treat abnormal heart rhythms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery from myocarditis depends on the cause of the problem and the child's overall health. Most children recover completely with proper treatment. However, some may have permanent heart disease. Newborns have the highest risk for serious disease and complications (including death) due to myocarditis. In rare cases, severe damage to the heart muscle requires a heart transplant.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Enlargement of the heart that leads to reduced heart function (dilated cardiomyopathy) Heart failure Heart rhythm problems  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your child's pediatrician if signs or symptoms of this condition occur. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. However, prompt testing and treatment may reduce the disease risk.  Images 
 
 
 Myocarditis 
 References 
 
 Park MK. Cardiovascular infections. In: Park MK, ed.  Park's Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 19. Spicer RL, Ware SM. Diseases of the myocardium. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 439. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia