
 Myocardial contusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myocardial contusion is a bruise of the heart muscle. Causes 
 
 The most common causes are: Car crashes Getting hit by a car Cardiopulmonary resuscitation  (CPR) Falling from a height, most often greater than 20 feet (6 meters) Symptoms 
 
 
A severe myocardial contusion may lead to signs and symptoms of a heart attack.
 Symptoms can include:
 Pain in the front of the ribs or breastbone
    Feeling that your heart is racing
    Lightheadedness Nausea or vomiting Shortness of breath Weakness
    Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Bruise or scrapes on the chest wall Crunching sensation when touching the skin if there are rib fractures and puncture of the lung Fast heartbeat Irregular heartbeat Low blood pressure Rapid or shallow breathing Tenderness to the touch Abnormal chest wall movement from rib fractures  Tests may include: Blood tests (cardiac enzymes, such as Troponin-I or T or CKMB) Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Electrocardiogram  (ECG or EKG) Echocardiogram These tests may show: Problems with the heart wall and the ability for the heart to contract Fluid or blood in the thin sac surrounding the heart (pericardium) Rib fractures, lung or blood vessel injury Problem with the heart's electrical signaling (such as a bundle branch block or other heart block) Fast heartbeat starting at the sinus node of the heart (sinus  tachycardia ) Abnormal heartbeat starting in the ventricles or lower chambers of the heart (ventricular dysrhythmia)  Treatment 
 
 In most cases, you will be closely monitored for at least 24 hours. An electrocardiogram (ECG) will be done continually to check your heart function.  Emergency room treatment may include: Catheter placement through a vein (IV) Medicines to relieve pain, heart rate disturbances, or low blood pressure Pacemaker (temporary, may be permanent later) Oxygen  Other therapies may be used to treat a heart injury, include: Chest tube placement Draining blood from around the heart Surgery to repair blood vessels in the chest  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with a mild myocardial contusion will recover completely most of the time.  Serious heart injuries can increase your risk for heart failure or heart rhythm problems. Prevention 
 
 The following safety tips may help prevent a heart bruise: Wear a seat belt when driving. Choose a car with air bags. Take steps to ensure safety when working at heights.  Alternative Names 
 
 Blunt myocardial injury Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 References 
 
 Eckstein M, Henderson SO. Thoracic trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Tsai PI, Wall MJ, Mattox KL. Traumatic heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 72. Read More 
 
 Muscle cramps 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 CPR 
 Heart Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia