
 Myotonia congenita 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myotonia congenita is an inherited condition that affects muscle relaxation. It is congenital, meaning that it is present from birth. It occurs more frequently in northern Scandinavia. Causes 
 
 Myotonia congenita is caused by a genetic change (mutation). It is passed down from either one or both parents to their children (inherited). Myotonia congenita is caused by a problem in the part of the muscle cells that are needed for muscles to relax. Abnormal repeated electrical signals occur in the muscles, causing a stiffness called myotonia. Symptoms 
 
 The hallmark of this condition is myotonia. This means the muscles are unable to quickly relax after contracting. For example, after a handshake, the person is only very slowly able to open and pull away his hand. Early symptoms may include: 
   Difficulty swallowing
    
   Gagging
    
   Stiff movements that improve when they are repeated
    Shortness of breath or tightening of the chest at the beginning of exercise Frequent falls Difficulty opening eyes after forcing them closed or crying Children with myotonia congenita often look muscular and well-developed. They may not have symptoms of myotonia congenita until age 2 or 3. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may ask if there is a family history of myotonia congenita. Tests include: Electromyography  (EMG, a test of the electrical activity of the muscles) Genetic testing Muscle biopsy Treatment 
 
 Mexiletine is a medicine that treats symptoms of myotonia congenita. Other treatments include: Phenytoin Procainamide Quinine Tocainide Carbamazepine Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this condition can do well. Symptoms only occur when a movement is first started. After a few repetitions, the muscle relaxes and the movement becomes normal.  Some people experience the opposite effect (paradoxical myotonia) and get worse with movement. Their symptoms may improve later in life. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Aspiration pneumonia  caused by swallowing difficulties Frequent choking, gagging, or trouble swallowing in an infant Long-term (chronic) joint problems Weakness of the abdominal muscles  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child has symptoms of myotonia congenita. Prevention 
 
 Couples who want to have children and who have a family history of myotonia congenita should consider genetic counseling. Alternative Names 
 
 Thomsen's disease; Becker's disease  Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Kerchner GA, Ptácek LJ. Channelopathies: Episodic and electrical disorders of the nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 99. Sarnat HB. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 609. Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 421. Read More 
 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Autosomal recessive 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Muscle Disorders 
 Neuromuscular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia