
 Myristica oil poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Myristica oil is a clear liquid that smells like the spice nutmeg. Myristica oil poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Myristica oil ( Myristica fragrans ) can be harmful. It comes from the seed of a nutmeg. Where Found 
 
 Myristica oil is found in: Aromatherapy products Mace Nutmeg  Other products may also contain myristica oil. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of myristica oil poisoning in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Chest pain  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Double vision Dry mouth Eye irritation  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Abdominal pain Dehydration Nausea  HEART AND BLOOD Rapid heartbeat NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Anxiety Brief euphoria (feeling of being drunk) Convulsions Delirium Drowsiness Hallucinations Headache Lightheadedness Seizures Tremors  SKIN Redness, flushing  Home Care 
 
 Get medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the product to the hospital with you, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.  The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Fluids through the vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much myristica oil they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Hallucinations, anxiety and other psychiatric symptoms, and visual problems are most common in severe overdoses. Deaths have been reported, but only very rarely. Alternative Names 
 
 Nutmeg oil; Myristicin  References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 64.  Ly BT, Williams SR. Hallucinogens. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 156. Maypole J, Woolf AD. Essential oils. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 101. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services / Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Browse the Encyclopedia