
 Nabothian cyst 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A nabothian cyst is a mucus-filled lump on the surface of the cervix. The cervix is located at the lower end of the womb (uterus) at the top of the vagina. It is about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) long. Causes 
 
 The cervix is lined with glands and cells that release mucus. The glands can become covered by a type of skin cells called squamous epithelium. When this happens, the secretions build up in the plugged glands. They form a smooth, rounded bump on the  cervix . The bump is called a nabothian cyst. Symptoms 
 
 Each nabothian cyst appears as a small, white raised bump. There can be more than one. Exams and Tests 
 
 During a pelvic exam, the health care provider will see a small, smooth, rounded lump (or collection of lumps) on the surface of the cervix. Rarely, magnifying the area (colposcopy) may be needed to tell these cysts from other bumps that can occur. Sometimes the cyst is opened to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 No treatment is necessary. Nabothian cysts do not cause any problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Nabothian cysts do not cause any harm. They are a  benign  condition. Possible Complications 
 
 The presence of many cysts or cysts that are large and blocked can make it hard for the health care provider to do a  Pap test . This is rare. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Most of the time, this condition is found during a routine pelvic exam. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention.  Images 
 
 
 Nabothian cyst 
 References 
 
 Choby BA. Cervical polyps. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 135. Lentz GM. History, physical examination, and preventive health care. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 7. Read More 
 
 Cervix 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cervix Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia