
 Nail polish poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This poisoning is from swallowing or breathing in (inhaling) nail polish. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: Toluene
    Butyl acetate
    Ethyl acetate
    Dibutyl phthalate Where Found 
 
 These ingredients can be found in various fingernail polishes.  Note:  This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of nail polish poisoning in different parts of the body.  BLADDER AND KIDNEYS  Increased need to urinate EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT  Eye irritation  and possible eye damage  GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM  Nausea and vomiting Abdominal pain HEART AND BLOOD CIRCULATION Chest pain Irregular heartbeat  LUNGS Difficulty breathing Slowed breathing rate Shortness of breath NERVOUS SYSTEM Drowsiness Balance problems Coma Euphoria (high feeling) Hallucinations Headache Seizures Stupor  (confusion, decreased level of consciousness) Walking problems  Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make the person throw up. Seek immediate emergency medical care. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition
 The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known)
 The time it was swallowed
 The amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. Symptoms will be treated as needed. The person may receive: Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed. Chest x-ray. EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing). Endoscopy -- a camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and stomach. Fluids through a vein (by IV). Irrigation (washing of the skin and eyes), which may occur every few hours for several days. Medicines to treat symptoms. Skin debridement (surgical removal of burned skin). Tube through the mouth into the stomach (rarely) to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Nail polish tends to come in small bottles, so serious poisoning is unlikely if only one bottle was swallowed. However, always seek immediate emergency medical care. Some people sniff nail polish on purpose to get intoxicated (drunk) by the fumes. Over time these people, as well as those working in poorly ventilated nail salons, can develop a condition known as "painter syndrome." This is a permanent condition that causes walking problems, speech problems, and memory loss. Painter syndrome may also be called organic solvent syndrome, psycho-organic syndrome, and chronic solvent encephalopathy (CSE). CSE can also cause symptoms such as headache, fatigue, mood disturbances, sleep disorders, and possible behavioral changes. Sudden death is possible in some nail polish poisoning cases. Alternative Names 
 
 Organic solvent syndrome; Psycho-organic syndrome; Chronic solvent encephalopathy References 
 
 Bruckner JV, Anand SS, Warren DA. Toxic effects of solvents and vapors. In: Klaassen CD, ed.  Casarett and Doull's Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Medical; 2013:chap 24. Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 147. Lee DC. Hydrocarbons. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 158. 
 Review Date 10/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia