
 Nasopharyngeal culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nasopharyngeal culture is a test that examines a sample of secretions from the uppermost part of the throat, behind the nose, to detect organisms that can cause disease. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to cough before the test begins and then tilt your head back. A sterile cotton-tipped swab is gently passed through a nostril and into the nasopharynx. This is the part of the pharynx that covers the roof of the mouth. The swab is quickly rotated and removed. The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria or other disease-causing organisms grow. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may have slight discomfort and may gag. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test identifies viruses and bacteria that cause upper respiratory tract symptoms. These include:  Bordetella pertussis Neisseria meningitidis Staphylococcus aureus Methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus Viral infections such as influenza or respiratory syncytial virus
  The culture may be used to help determine which antibiotic is appropriate to treat an infection due to bacteria. Normal Results 
 
 The presence of organisms commonly found in the nasopharynx is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The presence of any disease-causing virus, bacteria, or fungus means these organisms may be causing your infection.  Sometimes, organisms like  Staphylococcus aureus  can be present without causing disease. This test can help identify resistant strains of this organism (methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus , or  MRSA ) so that patients can be isolated when necessary. Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - nasopharyngeal; Swab for respiratory viruses; Swab for staph carriage Images 
 
 
 Nasopharyngeal culture 
 References 
 
 Murray PR. The clinician and the microbiology laboratory. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 16. 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections 
 Staphylococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia