
 Nausea and vomiting - adults 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nausea is feeling an urge to vomit. It is often called "being sick to your stomach." Vomiting or throwing-up is forcing the contents of the stomach up through the esophagus and out of the mouth. Causes 
 
 Many common problems may cause nausea and vomiting, including: Food allergies Infections of the stomach or bowels, such as the "stomach flu" or  food poisoning Leaking of stomach contents (food or liquid) upwards (also called  gastroesophageal reflux  or GERD) Medicines or medical treatments, such as cancer  chemotherapy  or radiation treatment Migraine headaches Morning sickness  during pregnancy Seasickness or motion sickness Severe pain, such as with kidney stones  Nausea and vomiting may also be early warning signs of more serious medical problems, such as: Appendicitis Blockage in the intestines Cancer or a tumor Ingesting a drug or poison, especially by children Ulcers in the lining of the stomach or small intestine Home Care 
 
 Once you and your health care provider find the cause, you will want to know  how to treat your nausea or vomiting . You may need to take medicine, change your diet, or try other things to make you feel better. It is very important to keep enough fluids in your body. Try drinking frequent, small amounts of  clear liquids . If you have morning sickness during pregnancy, ask your provider about possible treatments. The following may help treat motion sickness: Lying down. Taking over-the-counter antihistamines, such as dimenhydrinate (Dramamine). Using scopolamine prescription skin patches (such as Transderm Scop). These are helpful for extended trips, such as an ocean voyage. Use the patch as your doctor instructs. Scopolamine is for adults only. It should NOT be given to children.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or go to an emergency room if:  You think the vomiting is from poisoning. You notice blood or dark, coffee-colored material in the vomit.  Call a provider right away or seek medical care if you or another person has: Been vomiting for longer than 24 hours Been unable to keep any fluids down for 12 hours or more Headache or stiff neck Not urinated for 8 or more hours Severe stomach or belly pain Vomited 3 or more times in 1 day Signs of dehydration include: Crying without tears Dry mouth Increased thirst Eyes that appear sunken Skin changes: For example, if you touch or squeeze the skin, it doesn't bounce back the way it usually does Urinating less often or having dark yellow urine  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and will look for signs of dehydration. Your provider will ask questions about your symptoms, such as: When did the vomiting begin? How long has it lasted? How often does it occur? Does it occur after you eat, or on an empty stomach? Are other symptoms present such as abdominal pain, fever, diarrhea, or headaches? Are you  vomiting blood ? Are you vomiting anything that looks like coffee grounds? Are you vomiting undigested food? When was the last time you urinated?  Other questions you may be asked include: Have you been losing weight? Have you been traveling? Where? What medicines do you take? Did other people who ate at the same place as you have the same symptoms? Are you pregnant or could you be pregnant?  The diagnostic tests may be performed: Blood tests (such as  CBC  with  differential , blood  electrolyte  levels, and liver function tests) Urinalysis X-rays of the abdomen Depending on the cause and how much extra fluids you need, you may have to stay in the hospital or clinic for a period of time. You may need fluids given through your veins (intravenous or IV). Alternative Names 
 
 Emesis; Vomiting; Stomach upset; Upset stomach; Queasiness Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 References 
 
 Malagelada J-R, Malagelada C. Nausea and vomiting. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 15. Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 132. Read More 
 
 Dehydration 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Diet - clear liquid 
 Diet - full liquid 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Nausea and Vomiting 
 Browse the Encyclopedia