
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nephrotic syndrome is a group of symptoms that include  protein in the urine , low blood protein levels in the blood, high cholesterol levels, high triglyceride levels, and  swelling . Causes 
 
 Nephrotic syndrome is caused by different disorders that damage the kidneys. This damage leads to the release of too much protein in the urine. The most common cause in children is  minimal change disease .  Membranous glomerulonephritis  is the most common cause in adults. In both diseases, the glomeruli in the kidneys are damaged. Glomeruli are the structures that help filter wastes and fluids. This condition can also occur from: Cancer Diseases such as  diabetes ,  systemic lupus erythematosus ,  multiple myeloma , and  amyloidosis Genetic disorders Immune disorders Infections (such as strep throat, hepatitis, or  mononucleosis ) Use of certain drugs It can occur with kidney disorders such as: Focal and  segmental glomerulosclerosis Glomerulonephritis Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis Nephrotic syndrome can affect all age groups. In children, it is most common between ages 2 and 6. This disorder occurs slightly more often in males than females. Symptoms 
 
 Swelling ( edema ) is the most common symptom. It may occur: In the face and around the eyes ( facial swelling ) In the arms and legs, especially in the feet and ankles In the belly area ( swollen abdomen ) Other symptoms include: Skin rash or sores Foamy appearance of the urine Poor appetite Weight gain (unintentional)  from fluid retention Seizures Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam. Laboratory tests will be done to see how well the kidneys are working. They include: Albumin  blood test Blood chemistry tests such as  basic metabolic panel  or  comprehensive metabolic panel Blood urea nitrogen  (BUN) Creatinine - blood test Creatinine clearance - urine test Urinalysis Fats are often also present in the urine. Blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels may be high. A  kidney biopsy  may be needed to find the cause of the disorder. Tests to rule out various causes may include the following: Antinuclear antibody Cryoglobulins Complement levels Glucose tolerance test Hepatitis B and C antibodies HIV test Rheumatoid factor Serum protein electrophoresis  (SPEP) Syphilis serology Urine protein electrophoresis  (UPEP) This disease may also change the results of the following tests: Vitamin D level Serum iron Urinary casts Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to relieve symptoms, prevent complications, and delay  kidney damage . To control nephrotic syndrome, the disorder that is causing it must be treated. You may need treatment for life. Treatments may include any of the following: Keeping blood pressure at or below 130/80 mm Hg to delay kidney damage. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are the medicines most often used. ACE inhibitors and ARBs may also help decrease the amount of protein lost in the urine. Corticosteroids and other drugs that suppress or quiet the immune system. Treating high cholesterol to reduce the risk of heart and blood vessel problems. A low-fat, low-cholesterol diet is usually not enough for people with nephrotic syndrome. Medicines to reduce cholesterol and triglycerides (usually statins) may be needed. A low-salt diet may help with swelling in the hands and legs. Water pills (diuretics) may also help with this problem. Low-protein diets may be helpful. Your health care provider may suggest a moderate-protein diet (1 gram [gm] of protein per kilogram [kg] of body weight per day). Taking  vitamin D  supplements if nephrotic syndrome is long-term and is not responding to treatment. Taking blood thinner drugs to treat or prevent blood clots. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome varies. Some people recover from the condition. Others develop long-term kidney disease and need  dialysis  and eventually a  kidney transplant . Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from nephrotic syndrome include: Acute kidney failure Atherosclerosis  and related heart diseases Chronic kidney disease Fluid overload,  congestive heart failure ,  pulmonary edema Infections, including pneumococcal  pneumonia Malnutrition Renal vein thrombosis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of nephrotic syndrome, including swelling in face, belly, or arms and legs, or skin sores You're being treated for nephrotic syndrome, but your symptoms don't improve New symptoms develop, including  cough ,  decreased urine output ,  discomfort with urination ,  fever , severe  headache Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have seizures. Prevention 
 
 Treating conditions that can cause nephrotic syndrome may help prevent the syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Nephrosis Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Nachman PH, Jennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary glomerular disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 31. Pais P, Avner ED. Nephrotic syndrome. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 527. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Diabetes 
 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hardening of the arteries 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Malignancy 
 Membranous nephropathy 
 Minimal change disease 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Protein urine test 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Swelling 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia