
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nephrocalcinosis is a disorder in which there is too much calcium deposited in the kidneys. It is common in premature babies. Causes 
 
 Any disorder that leads to high levels of calcium in the blood or urine may lead to nephrocalcinosis. In nephrocalcinosis, calcium deposits form in the kidney tissue itself. Most of the time, both kidneys are affected. Nephrocalcinosis is related to, but not the same as,  kidney stones  (nephrolithiasis). Conditions that can cause nephrocalcinosis include: Alport syndome Bartter syndrome Chronic  glomerulonephritis Familial hypomagnesemia Medullary sponge kidney Primary hyperoxaluria Renal transplant rejection Renal tubular acidosis Renal  cortical  necrosis Other possible causes of nephrocalcinosis include: Ethylene glycol toxicity Hypercalcemia  (excess calcium in the blood) due to  hyperparathyroidism Use of certain medicines, such as acetazolamide, amphotericin B, and triamterene Sarcoidosis Tuberculosis  of the kidney and infections related to AIDS Vitamin D toxicity Symptoms 
 
 Most of the time, there are no early symptoms of nephrocalcinosis beyond those of the condition causing the problem. People who also have kidney stones may have: Blood in the urine Fever and chills Nausea and vomiting Severe pain in the belly area, sides of the back (flank), groin, or testicles Later symptoms related to nephrocalcinosis may be associated with  chronic kidney failure . Exams and Tests 
 
 Nephrocalcinosis may be discovered when symptoms of  renal insufficiency ,  kidney failure , obstructive uropathy, or  urinary tract stones  develop. Imaging tests can help diagnose this condition. Tests that may be done include: Abdominal CT scan Ultrasound  of the kidney  Other tests that may be done to diagnose and determine the severity of associated disorders include: Blood tests to check levels of calcium, phosphate, uric acid, and parathyroid hormone Urinalysis  to see crystals and check for red blood cells 24-hour urine collection to measure acidity and levels of calcium, sodium, uric acid, oxalate, and citrate  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms and prevent more calcium from building up in the kidneys. Treatment will involve methods to reduce abnormal levels of calcium, phosphate, and oxalate in the blood and urine. Options include making changes in your diet and taking medicines and supplements. If you take medicine that causes calcium loss, your health care provider will most often tell you to stop taking it. Never stop taking any medicine before talking to your provider. Other symptoms, including kidney stones, should be treated as is appropriate. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 What to expect depends on the complications and cause of the disorder. Proper treatment may help prevent further deposits in the kidneys. In most cases, there is no way to remove deposits that have already formed. Many deposits of calcium in the kidneys do NOT always mean severe damage to the kidneys. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute renal failure Chronic renal failure Kidney stones Obstructive uropathy  (acute or chronic, unilateral or bilateral) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you know you have a disorder that causes high levels of calcium in your blood and urine. Also call you if you develop symptoms of nephrocalcinosis. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of disorders that lead to nephrocalcinosis, including  renal tubular acidosis , may help prevent it from developing. Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Bushinsky DA. Nephrolithiasis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 126. Elder JS. Urinary lithiasis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 547. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Bladder stones 
 Calcium - ionized 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Kidney stones 
 Necrosis 
 Obstructive uropathy 
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Renal 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Kidney stones - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia