
 Neurofibromatosis 2 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) is a disorder in which tumors form on the nerves of the brain and spine (the central nervous system). It is passed down (inherited) in families. Although it has a similar name to  neurofibromatosis type 1 , it is a different and separate condition. Causes 
 
 NF2 can be passed down through families in an  autosomal dominant  pattern. This means that if 1 parent has NF2, any child of that parent has a 50% chance of inheriting the condition. The main risk factor is having a family history of the condition. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of NF2 include: Balance problems Cataracts  at a young age Changes in vision Coffee-colored marks on the skin (café-au-lait) Headaches Hearing loss Ringing and noises in the ears Weakness of the face  Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs of NF2 include: Brain and spinal tumors Hearing-related (acoustic) tumors Skin tumors  Tests include: Genetic testing Medical history MRI Physical examination  Treatment 
 
 Acoustic tumors can be observed, or treated with surgery or  radiation . People with this disorder may benefit from genetic counseling. People with NF2 should be regularly evaluated with these tests: MRI of the brain and spinal cord Hearing and speech evaluation Eye exam Support Groups 
 
 A support group can be helpful for emotional support and for giving and receiving practical advice. For information and support, visit  www.ctf.org . Alternative Names 
 
 NF2; Bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis; Central bilateral acoustic NF Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Evans DG. Neurofibromatosis 2.  GeneReviews . Seattle, WA; University of Washington; 2011:8.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1201/ . Accessed: October 24, 2015. Sahin M. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme III JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 596. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Neurofibromatosis-1 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Neurofibromatosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia