
 Neurosarcoidosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurosarcoidosis is a complication of  sarcoidosis , in which inflammation occurs in the brain, spinal cord, and other areas of the nervous system. Causes 
 
 Sarcoidosis is a long-term disorder that affects many parts of the body, mostly the lungs. In a small number of patients, the disease involves some part of the nervous system. This is called neurosarcoidosis. Neurosarcoidosis may affect any part of the nervous system. Sudden, facial weakness ( facial palsy ) is a common neurological symptom that involves the nerves to the muscles of the face. Any other nerve in the skull can be affected, including those in the eye and those that control taste, smell, or hearing. The spinal cord is another part of the nervous system that sarcoid can affect. People may have weakness in their arms and legs, and difficulty walking or controlling their urine. The condition can also affect the parts of the brain involved in regulating many body functions, such as temperature, sleep, and stress responses. Muscle weakness  or sensory losses can occur with  peripheral  nerve involvement. Other areas of the brain, including the pituitary gland at the base of the brain, or the spinal cord may also be involved. Symptoms 
 
 Involvement of the pituitary gland can cause: Changes in menstrual periods Excessive tiredness  or fatigue Excessive thirst High urine output The symptoms vary. Any part of the nervous system can be affected. Involvement of the brain or cranial nerves can cause: Confusion , disorientation Decreased hearing Dementia Delirium Dizziness ,  vertigo , or abnormal sensations of movement Double vision or other vision problems Facial palsy (weakness, drooping) Headache Loss of sense of smell Loss of sense of taste ,  abnormal tastes Psychiatric disturbances Seizures Speech impairment  Involvement of one or more  peripheral  nerves can lead to: Abnormal sensations  in any body part Loss of movement  of any body part Loss of sensation  in any body part Weakness of any body part  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam may show problems with one or more nerves. A history of sarcoidosis followed by nerve-related symptoms highly suggests neurosarcoidosis. However, symptoms of the condition can mimic other medical disorders, including  diabetes insipidus ,  hypopituitarism ,  optic neuritis ,  meningitis , and certain tumors. Sometimes, the nervous system can be affected before a person is known to have sarcoid, or without affecting the lungs or other organs at all. Blood tests are not very helpful in diagnosing the condition. A  lumbar puncture  may show signs of inflammation. Increased levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme may be found in the blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). However, this is not a reliable diagnostic test. MRI of the brain may be helpful. A  chest x-ray  often reveals signs of sarcoidosis of the lungs.  Nerve biopsy  of affected nerve tissue confirms the disorder. Treatment 
 
 There is no known cure for sarcoidosis. Treatment is given if symptoms are severe or are getting worse. The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms. Corticosteroids such as prednisone are prescribed to reduce inflammation. They are often prescribed until symptoms get better or go away. You may need to take the medicines for months, or even years. Other medications may include hormone replacement and medicines that suppress the immune system. If you have numbness, weakness, vision or hearing problems, or other problems due to damage of the nerves in the head, you may need physical therapy, braces, a cane, or a walker. Psychiatric disorders or dementia may require medication for depression, safety interventions, and assistance with care. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some cases go away on their own in 4 - 6 months. Others continue off and on for the rest of the person's life. Neurosarcoidosis can cause permanent disability and, in some cases, death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications vary depending on which part of the nervous system is involved and how you respond to treatment. Slowly worsening or permanent loss of neurological function is possible. In rare cases, the brainstem may be involved. This is life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have sarcoidosis and any neurological symptoms occur. Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a sudden loss of sensation, movement, or body function. Prevention 
 
 Aggressive treatment of sarcoidosis turns off the body's faulty immune response before your nerves become damaged. This may reduce the chance that neurological symptoms will occur. Alternative Names 
 
 Sarcoidosis - nervous system Images 
 
 
 Sarcoid, stage I - chest x-ray 
 Sarcoid, stage II - chest x-ray 
 Sarcoid, stage IV - chest x-ray 
 References 
 
 Aminoff MJ, Josephson SA. Neurological complications of systemic disease: adults. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 49A. Iannuzzi M. Sarcoidosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 95. Read More 
 
 Bell palsy 
 Chronic 
 Peripheral 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia