
 Neurosciences 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurosciences refers to the branch of medicine that focuses on the nervous system. The nervous system is made of two parts: The central nervous system consists of your brain and spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system consists of all your nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord, including those in your arms, legs, and trunk of the body. Together, your brain and spinal cord serve as the main "processing center" for the entire nervous system, and control all the functions of your body. Information 
 
 A number of different medical conditions can affect the nervous system, including: Blood vessel disorders in the brain, including  arteriovenous malformations  and cerebral aneurysms Brain cancer Degenerative diseases, including  Alzheimer disease  and Parkinson disease 
  Disorders of the pituitary gland Epilepsy Headaches, including  migraines Movement disorders, such as tremors and  Parkinson disease Multiple sclerosis Neuro-ophthalmologic diseases, which are vision problems that result from damage to the optic nerve or its connections to the brain Peripheral nerve diseases (neuropathy), which affect the nerves that carry information to and from the brain and spinal cord 
 Mental disorders, such as  schizophrenia Spine disorders Infections, such as meningitis Stroke DIAGNOSIS AND TESTING Neurologists and other neuroscience specialists use special tests and imaging techniques to see how the nerves and brain are working. In addition to blood and urine tests, tests done to diagnose nervous system diseases may include: Computed tomography (CT scan) Discography (x-ray of the spinal discs) to determine the cause of low back pain Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to check for infection of the spinal cord and brain 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or  magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA) Electroencephalography  (EEG) to look at brain activity Electromyography  (EMG) to test nerve and muscle function Electronystagmography  (ENG) to check for abnormal eye movements, which can be a sign of a brain disorder Evoked potentials  (or evoked response), which looks at how the brain responds to sounds, sight, and touch Magnetoencephalography (MEG) Myelogram of the spine to diagnose nerve injury Nerve conduction velocity  (NCV) test Neurocognitive testing (neuropsychological testing) Polysomnogram  to see how the brain reacts during sleep Position emission tomography (PET) scan to look at brain metabolic activity Skin biopsy to measure if there's a problem with nerve endings TREATMENT Neuroradiology is a branch of neuroscience medicine that focuses on diagnosing and treating nervous system problems. Interventional neuroradiology involves inserting tiny, flexible tubes called catheters into blood vessels leading to the brain. This allows the doctor to treat blood vessel disorders that can affect the nervous system, such as stroke. Interventional neuroradiology (or vascular therapy) treatments include: Balloon angioplasty and stenting of carotid or vertebral artery Endovascular embolization  and coiling to treat cerebral aneurysms Intra-arterial therapy for stroke Radiation oncology of the brain and spine Open or traditional neurosurgery may be needed in some cases to treat problems in the brain and surrounding structures. This is more invasive surgery that requires the surgeon to make an opening, called a  craniotomy , in the skull. Microsurgery allows the surgeon to work on very small structures in the brain using a microscope and very small, precise instruments. Stereotactic radiosurgery  may be needed for certain types of nervous system disorders. This is a form of radiation therapy that focuses high-powered x-rays on a small area of the body, thereby avoiding damage to surrounding brain tissue. Treatment of nervous system-related diseases or disorders may also include: Medications, possibly given by a drug pumps (such as those used for patients with severe muscle spasms) Deep brain stimulation Rehabilitation/physical therapy after brain injury or stroke Spinal surgery WHO IS INVOLVED The neurosciences medical team is often made up of health care providers from many different specialties. This may include: Neurologist: A doctor who has received extra training in the treatment of brain and nervous system disorders Vascular surgeon: A doctor who has received extra training in the surgical treatment of blood vessel disorders Neurosurgeon: A doctor who has received extra training in brain and spine surgery Neuropsychologist: A doctor specially trained in administering and interpreting tests of the cognitive function of the brain Radiologist: A doctor who received extra training in interpreting medical images and in performing different procedures using imaging technology specifically for treating brain and nervous system disorders Nurse practitioners (NPs) Physician assistants (PAs) Nutritionists or dietitians Primary care doctors Physical therapists, who help with mobility, strength, balance, and flexibility Occupational therapists, who help keep people functioning well in the home and at work Speech-language therapists, who help with speech, language, and understanding This list is not all-inclusive. References 
 
 Brazier MAB. The emergence of electrophysiology as an aid to neurology. In: Aminoff MJ, ed.  Aminoff's Electrodiagnosis in Clinical Neurology.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012:chap 1. Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK. Diagnosis of neurological disease. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 1. Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK. Laboratory investigations in diagnosis and management of neurological disease. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 33. Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK. Management of neurological disease. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 53. Meyer PT, Rijntjes M, Hellwig S, Kloppel S, Weiller C. Functional neuroimaging. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice.  7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 41. 
 Review Date 1/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Neurologic Diseases 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia