
 Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) are a group of rare nervous system disorders. They are passed down through families (inherited). NBIA involves movement problems, dementia, and other nervous system symptoms. Causes 
 
 Symptoms of NBIA begin in childhood or adulthood. There are 10 types of NBIA. Each type is caused by a different gene defect. The most common gene defect causes the disorder called PKAN (pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration). People with all forms of NBIA have a buildup of iron in the basal ganglia. This is an area deep inside the brain. It helps control movement. Symptoms 
 
 NBIA mainly causes movement problems. Other symptoms may include: Dementia Difficulty speaking Difficulty swallowing Muscle problems such as rigidity or involuntary muscle contractions ( dystonia ) Seizures Tremor Vision loss, such as from  retinitis pigmentosa Weakness Writhing movements Toe walking Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms and medical history. Genetic tests can look for the defective gene that causes the disease. However, these tests aren't widely available. Tests such as an  MRI  scan can help rule out other movement disorders and diseases. The MRI usually shows iron deposits in the basal ganglia, and are called the "eye of the tiger" sign because of the way the deposits look in the scan. This sign suggests a diagnosis of PKAN. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for NBIA. Medicines that bind iron may help slow the disease. Treatment is mainly focused on controlling the symptoms. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 NBIA gets worse and damages the nerves over time. It leads to a lack of movement, and often death by early adulthood. Possible Complications 
 
 Medicine used to treat symptoms can cause complications. Being unable to move from the disease can lead to: Blood clots 
   Respiratory infections
    
   Skin breakdown
    When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child develops: 
   Increased stiffness in the arms or legs
    
   Increasing problems at school
    
   Unusual movements
    Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be recommended for families affected by this illness. There is no known way to prevent it. Alternative Names 
 
 Hallervorden-Spatz disease; Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration; PKAN; NBIA References 
 
 Gregory A, Hayflick S. Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation disorders overview. In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et al, eds.  GeneReviews . Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016. Updated April 24, 2014.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK121988 . Accessed July 29, 2016. Jankovic J. Parkinson disease and other movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 96. NBIA Disorders Association. Overview of NBIA Disorders. NBIAdisorders.org.  www.nbiadisorders.org/about-nbia/overview-of-nbia-disorders . Accessed July 29, 2016. Read More 
 
 Muscle cramps 
 
 Review Date 7/4/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia