
 Neurosyphilis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurosyphilis is a bacterial infection of the brain or spinal cord. It usually occurs in people who have had untreated  syphilis  for many years. Causes 
 
 Neurosyphilis is caused by  Treponema pallidum . This is the bacteria that causes syphilis. It usually occurs about 10 to 20 years after a person is first infected with syphilis. Not everyone who has syphilis develops this complication. There are four different forms of neurosyphilis: Asymptomatic  (most common form) General paresis Meningovascular Tabes dorsalis Asymptomatic neurosyphilis occurs before  symptomatic  syphilis. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually affect the nervous system. Depending on the form of neurosyphilis, symptoms may include any of the following: Abnormal walk  (gait), or unable to walk Numbness in the toes, feet, or legs Problems with thinking, such as confusion or poor concentration Mental problems, such as depression or irritability Headache, seizures, or stiff neck Incontinence Tremors, or weakness Visual problems , even blindness  Some people have no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical examination and may find the following: Abnormal reflexes Muscle atrophy Muscle contractions  Blood tests can be done to detect substances produced by the bacteria that cause syphilis, this includes:  Venereal disease research laboratory test ( VDRL ) Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption ( FTA-ABS ) Rapid plasma reagin ( RPR ) Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA)  With neurosyphilis, it is important to test the spinal fluid for signs of syphilis. Tests to look for problems with the nervous system may include: Cerebral angiogram Head CT scan Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) and cerebrospinal fluid analysis ( CSF fluid analysis ) MRI  scan of the brain, brainstem, or spinal cord  Treatment 
 
 The antibiotic penicillin is used to treat neurosyphilis. It can be given in different ways: Injected into a vein several times a day for 10 to 14 days. By mouth 4 times a day, combined with daily muscle injections, both taken for 10 to 14 days.  You must have follow-up blood tests at 3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 months to make sure the infection is gone. You will need follow-up lumbar punctures for CSF fluid analysis every 6 months. If you have HIV/AIDS or another medical condition, your follow-up schedule may be different. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Neurosyphilis is a life-threatening complication of syphilis. How well you do depends on how severe the neurosyphilis is before treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 The symptoms can slowly worsen. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have had syphilis in the past and now have signs of nervous system problems. Prevention 
 
 Prompt diagnosis and treatment of the original syphilis infection can prevent neurosyphilis. Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 Late-stage syphilis 
 References 
 
 Berger JR, Dean D. Neurosyphilis.  Handb Clin Neurol . 2014;121:1461-72. PMID 24365430  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24365430 . Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis (Treponema pallidum). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 239. Read More 
 
 Asymptomatic 
 General paresis 
 Muscle function loss 
 Seizures 
 Symptomatic 
 Syphilitic aseptic meningitis 
 Tabes dorsalis 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Syphilis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia