
 Neurocognitive disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Neurocognitive disorder is a general term that describes decreased mental function due to a medical disease other than a psychiatric illness. It is often used synonymously (but incorrectly) with  dementia . Causes 
 
 Listed below are conditions associated with neurocognitive disorder.  BRAIN INJURY CAUSED BY TRAUMA Bleeding into the brain (intracerebral hemorrhage) Bleeding into the space around the brain ( subarachnoid hemorrhage ) Blood clot inside the skull causing pressure on brain ( subdural hematoma ) Concussion BREATHING CONDITIONS Low oxygen in the body (hypoxia) High carbon dioxide level in the body (hypercapnia) CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS Dementia due to many strokes ( multi-infarct dementia ) Heart infections ( endocarditis ,  myocarditis ) Stroke Transient ischemic attack ( TIA ) DEGENERATIVE DISORDERS Alzheimer disease  (also called senile dementia, Alzheimer type) Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease Diffuse Lewy Body disease Huntington disease Multiple sclerosis Normal pressure hydrocephalus Parkinson disease Pick disease DEMENTIA DUE TO METABOLIC CAUSES Kidney disease Liver disease Thyroid disease ( hyperthyroidism  or  hypothyroidism ) Vitamin deficiency (B1, B12, or folate) DRUG AND ALCOHOL-RELATED CONDITIONS Alcohol withdrawal state Intoxication from drug or  alcohol use Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome  (a long-term effect of excessive alcohol consumption or  malnutrition ) Withdrawal from drugs (especially sedative-hypnotics and corticosteroids) INFECTIONS Any sudden onset (acute) or long-term (chronic) infection Blood poisoning ( septicemia ) Brain infection ( encephalitis ) Meningitis  (infection of the lining of the brain and spinal cord) Prion infections, such as mad cow disease Late-stage syphilis Complications of cancer can also lead to neurocognitive disorder. Other conditions that may mimic organic brain syndrome include: Depression Neurosis Psychosis Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can differ based on the disease. In general, organic brain syndromes cause: Agitation Confusion Long-term loss of brain function ( dementia ) Severe, short-term loss of brain function ( delirium ) Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests depend on the disorder, but may include: 
   Blood tests
    Electroencephalogram  (EEG)
    Head CT scan Head MRI Lumbar puncture  (spinal tap) Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the underlying condition. Many conditions are treated mainly with rehabilitation and supportive care to help the person with activities lost due to areas where brain function is affected. Medicines may be needed to reduce aggressive behaviors that can occur with some of the conditions. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some disorders are short-term and treatable. But many are long-term or get worse over time. Possible Complications 
 
 People with neurocognitive disorder often lose the ability to interact with others or function on their own.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have been diagnosed with organic brain syndrome and you are uncertain about the exact disorder. You have symptoms of this condition. You have been diagnosed with neurocognitive disorder and your symptoms become worse. Alternative Names 
 
 Organic mental disorder (OMS); Organic brain syndrome Images 
 
 
 Brain 
 References 
 
 Beck BJ, Tompkins KJ. Mental disorders due to another medical condition. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 21. Douglas VC, Josephson SA. Dementia and systemic disease. In: Aminoff MJ, ed.  Aminoff's Neurology and General Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 61. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Alcohol withdrawal 
 Alzheimer disease 
 Arrhythmias 
 Chronic subdural hematoma 
 CO2 blood test 
 Concussion 
 Confusion 
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
 Dementia due to metabolic causes 
 Depression - overview 
 Encephalitis 
 Endocarditis 
 Huntington disease 
 Meningitis 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Myocarditis 
 Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
 Parkinson disease 
 Pick disease 
 Septicemia 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Stroke 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 Substance use 
 Transient ischemic attack 
 Vascular dementia 
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dementia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia