
 Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is a group of defects, passed down through families. The disorder involves the skin, nervous system, eyes,  endocrine  glands, urinary and reproductive systems, and bones. It causes an unusual facial appearance and a higher risk of skin cancers and noncancerous tumors. Causes 
 
 Nevoid basal cell carcinoma nevus syndrome is a rare genetic condition. The gene linked to the syndrome is known as PTCH ("patched"). The gene is passed down through families as an  autosomal dominant  trait. This means you develop the syndrome if either parent passes the gene to you. Symptoms 
 
 Main symptoms of this disorder are: A type of skin cancer called  basal cell carcinoma  that develops around the time of puberty A noncancerous tumor of the jaw, called kerotocystic odontogenic tumor that also develops during puberty Other symptoms include: Broad nose Cleft palate Heavy, protruding brow Jaw that sticks out (in some cases) Wide-set eyes  Pitting on palms and soles The condition may affect the nervous system and lead to: Blindness Deafness Intellectual disability Seizures Tumors of the brain The condition also leads to bone defects, including: Curvature of the back ( scoliosis) Severe curvature of the back ( kyphosis )  Abnormal ribs Exams and Tests 
 
 There may be a family history of this disorder and a past history of basal cell skin cancers. Tests may reveal: Brain tumors Cysts in the jaw, which can lead to abnormal tooth development or jaw fractures Defects in the colored part (iris) or lens of the eye Head swelling due to fluid on the brain ( hydrocephalus) Rib abnormalities Tests that may be done include: Echocardiogram  of the heart Genetic testing (in some patients) MRI of the brain Skin biopsy  of tumors X-rays of the bones, teeth, and skull Ultrasound to check for ovarian tumors Treatment 
 
 It is important to get examined by a skin doctor (dermatologist) often, so that skin cancers may be treated while they are still small. People with this disorder may also be seen and treated by other specialists, depending on which part of the body is affected. For example, a cancer specialist (oncologist) may treat tumors in the body, and an orthopedic surgeon may help treat bone problems. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Frequent follow-up with a variety of specialist doctors is important to having a good outcome. Possible Complications 
 
 Persons with this condition may develop: Blindness Brain tumor Deafness Fractures Ovarian tumors Skin damage and severe scarring due to skin cancers  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: You or any family members have nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, especially if you are planning to have a child. You have a child who has symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Couples with a family history of this syndrome might consider  genetic counseling  before becoming pregnant. Staying out of the sun and using sunscreen can help prevent new basal cell skin cancers. Avoid radiation such as x-rays. People with this condition are very sensitive to radiation. Exposure to radiation can lead to skin cancers. Alternative Names 
 
 NBCC syndrome; Gorlin-Goltz syndrome; Basal cell nevus syndrome; BCNS; Basal cell cancer - nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome Images 
 
 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - close-up of palm 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - plantar pits 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - face and hand 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome 
 Basal cell nevus syndrome - face 
 References 
 
 Evans DG, Farndon PA. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.  GeneReviews.  2015:10. PMID 20301330.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301330 . Published June 20, 2002. Updated October 1, 2015. Accessed April 29, 2016. Reutemann P, Peck GL. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 162. Read More 
 
 Basal cell skin cancer 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Cancer 
 Cyst 
 Endocrine glands 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Intellectual disability 
 Kyphosis 
 Scoliosis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 4/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Skin Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia