
 Night terror 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
  
 Night terrors (sleep terrors) are a sleep disorder in which a person quickly wakes from sleep in a terrified state. Causes 
 
 The cause is unknown, but night terrors may be triggered by: Fever Lack of sleep Periods of emotional  tension ,  stress , or conflict  Night terrors are most common in children ages 3 through 7, and much less common after that. Night terrors may run in families. They can occur in adults, especially when there is emotional tension or alcohol use. Symptoms 
 
 Night terrors are most common during the first third of the night, often between midnight and 2 a.m. Children often scream and are very frightened and confused. They thrash around violently and are often not aware of their surroundings. The child may not be able to respond to being talked to, comforted, or awakened. The child may be sweating, breathing very fast ( hyperventilating ), have a  fast heart rate , and widened (dilated) pupils. The spell may last 10 to 20 minutes, then the child goes back to sleep. Most children are unable to explain what happened the next morning. They often have no memory of the event when they wake up the next day. Children with night terrors may also  sleep walk . In contrast,  nightmares  are more common in the early morning. They may occur after someone watches frightening movies or TV shows, or has an emotional experience. A person may remember the details of a dream after waking up and will not be disoriented after the episode. Exams and Tests 
 
 In many cases, no further examination or testing is needed. If the night terror is severe or prolonged, the child may need a psychological evaluation. Treatment 
 
 In many cases, a child who has a night terror only needs to be comforted. Reducing stress or using coping mechanisms may reduce night terrors. Talk therapy or counseling may be needed in some cases. Medicines prescribed for use at bedtime will often reduce night terrors, but are rarely used to treat this disorder. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most children outgrow night terrors. Episodes usually decrease after age 10. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: Night terrors occur often They disrupt sleep on a regular basis Other symptoms occur with the night terror The night terror causes, or almost causes, injuries Prevention 
 
 Minimizing stress or using coping mechanisms may reduce night terrors. Alternative Names 
 
 Pavor nocturnus; Sleep terror disorder References 
 
 Owens JA. Sleep medicine. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 19. Read More 
 
 Drowsiness 
 Incidence 
 Nightmares 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia