
 Nikolsky sign 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nikolsky sign is a skin finding in which the top layers of the skin slip away from the lower layers when slightly rubbed. Considerations 
 
 Your health care provider may use a pencil eraser to test for Nikolsky sign. The eraser is placed on your skin and gently twirled back and forth. If the test result is positive, a blister will form in the area, usually within minutes. A positive result is usually a sign of a blistering skin condition. People with a positive sign have loose skin that slips free from the underlying layers when rubbed. The area beneath is pink and moist, and usually very tender. Causes 
 
 The Nikolsky sign can be often found in people with: Autoimmune blistering conditions such as  pemphigus vulgaris Bacterial infections such as  scalded skin syndrome Drug reactions such as  erythema multiforme When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child develops painful loosening, redness, and blistering of the skin, which you do not know the cause of (for example, a skin burn). What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The conditions associated with Nikolsky sign can be serious. Some people need to be admitted to the hospital. You will be asked about your medical history and given a  physical examination . You may be given fluid and antibiotics through a vein ( intravenously ). Treatment will depend on the cause of the condition. Images 
 
 
 Nikolsky sign 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Garber B, Cydulka RK. Dermatologic presentations. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 120. Habif TP. Vesicular and bullous diseases. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Erythema multiforme 
 Pemphigus vulgaris 
 Scalded skin syndrome 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pemphigus 
 Skin Conditions 
 Skin Infections 
 Staphylococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia