
 Nipple discharge 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nipple discharge is any fluid that comes out of the nipple area in your breast. Causes 
 
 Sometimes discharge from your nipples is okay and will get better on its own. You are more likely to have nipple discharge if you have been pregnant at least once. Nipple discharge is usually not cancer (benign), but rarely it can be a sign of breast cancer. It is important to find out what is causing it and to get treatment. Here are some reasons for nipple discharge: Pregnancy Recent breastfeeding Rubbing on the area from a bra or t-shirt Injury to the breast Infection Inflammation and clogging of the breast ducts Noncancerous pituitary tumors Small growth in the breast that is usually not cancer Severe underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) Fibrocystic breast (normal lumpiness in the breast) Use of certain medicines Use of certain herbs, such as anise and fennel Widening of the milk ducts  Sometimes, babies can have nipple discharge. This is caused by hormones from the mother before birth. It should go away in 2 weeks. Cancers such as Paget's disease (a rare type of cancer involving the skin of the nipple) can also cause nipple discharge. Symptoms 
 
 Nipple discharge that is NOT normal is: Bloody Comes from only 1 nipple Comes out on its own without you squeezing or touching your nipple  Nipple discharge is more likely to be normal if it: Comes out of both nipples Happens when you squeeze your nipples  The color of the discharge does not tell you whether it is normal. The discharge can look milky, clear, yellow, green, or brown. Squeezing your nipple to check for discharge can make it worse. Leaving the nipple alone may make the discharge stop. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. Tests that may be done include: Prolactin blood test Thyroid blood tests Head CT scan  or  MRI  to look for pituitary tumor Mammography Ultrasound of the breast Breast biopsy Ductography or ductogram, an x-ray with contrast dye injected into the affected milk duct Skin biopsy , if Paget's disease is a concern  Treatment 
 
 Once the cause of your nipple discharge is found, your doctor or nurse can recommend ways to treat it. You may: Need to change any medicine that caused the discharge Have lumps removed Have all or some of the breast ducts removed Receive creams to treat skin changes around your nipple Receive medicines to treat a health condition  If all of your tests are normal, you may not need treatment. You should have another mammogram and physical exam within 1 year. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, nipple problems are not  breast cancer . These problems will either go away with the right treatment, or they can be watched closely over time. Possible Complications 
 
 Nipple discharge may be a symptom of  breast cancer  or a pituitary tumor. Skin changes around the nipple may be caused by Paget's disease. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Have your health care provider evaluate any nipple discharge.  Alternative Names 
 
 Discharge from breasts; Milk secretions; Lactation - abnormal; Witch's milk (neonatal milk); Galactorrhea; Inverted nipple; Nipple problems Images 
 
 
 Female breast 
 Intraductal papilloma 
 Mammary gland 
 Abnormal discharge from the nipple 
 Normal female breast anatomy 
 References 
 
 Gray RJ, Pockaj BA, Karstaedt PJ. Navigating murky waters: a modern treatment algorithm for nipple discharge.  Am J Surg . 2007;194:850-4. PMID: 18005783  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18005783 . Katz VL, Dotters D. Breast diseases: diagnosis and treatmentof benign and malignant disease. In: Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Katz VL, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 15. Leitch AM, Ashfag R. Discharges and secretions of the nipple. In: Bland KI, Copeland EM III, eds.  The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Disorders.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2009:chap 4. Melmed S, Kleinberg D, Ho K. Pituitary physiology and diagnostic evaluation. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 8. Read More 
 
 Breast cancer 
 Endocrine glands 
 Intraductal papilloma 
 
 Review Date 11/16/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia