
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is cancer of the lymph tissue. Lymph tissue is found in the lymph nodes, spleen, and other organs of the immune system. White blood cells called lymphocytes are found in lymph tissue. They help prevent infections. Most lymphomas start in a type of white blood cell called the B lymphocyte, or B cell. Causes 
 
 For most people, the cause of NHL is unknown. But lymphomas may develop in people with weakened immune systems, including people who have had an organ transplant or people with HIV infection.  NHL most often affects adults. Men develop NHL more often than women. Children can also develop some forms of NHL. There are many types of NHL. One classification (grouping) is by how fast the cancer spreads. The cancer may be low grade (slow growing), intermediate grade, or high grade (fast growing).  NHL is further grouped by how the cells look under the microscope, what type of white blood cell it originates from, and whether there are certain DNA changes in the tumor cells themselves. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on what area of the body is affected by the cancer and how fast the cancer is growing. Symptoms may include: Drenching night sweats Fever  and chills that come and go Itching Swollen lymph nodes  in the neck, underarms, groin, or other areas Weight loss Coughing or shortness of breath if the cancer affects the thymus gland or lymph nodes in the chest, putting pressure on the windpipe (trachea) or its branches Abdominal pain or swelling, leading to loss of appetite, constipation, nausea, and vomiting Headache, concentration problems, personality changes, or  seizures  if the cancer affects the brain  Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam and check body areas with lymph nodes to feel if they are swollen. The disease may be diagnosed after biopsy of suspected tissue, usually a  lymph node biopsy . Other tests that may be done include: Blood test to check protein levels, liver function, kidney function, and uric acid level Complete blood count  (CBC) CT scans  of the chest, abdomen and pelvis
    Bone marrow biopsy PET  (positron emission tomography) scan
    If tests show you have NHL, more tests will be done to see how far it has spread. This is called staging. Staging helps guide future treatment and follow-up. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on: The specific type of NHL The  stage  when you are first diagnosed Your age and overall health Symptoms, including weight loss, fever, and night sweats  You may receive  chemotherapy ,  radiation therapy , or both. Or you may not need immediate treatment. Your doctor can tell you more about your specific treatment. Radioimmunotherapy may be used in some cases. This involves linking a radioactive substance to an antibody that targets the cancerous cells and injecting the substance into the body. A type of chemotherapy called  targeted therapy  may be tried. It uses a drug to zero in on specific targets (molecules) in or on cancer cells. Using these targets, the drug disables the cancer cells so they cannot spread. High-dose chemotherapy may be given when NHL recurs or fails to respond to the first treatment administered. This is followed by an autologous  stem cell transplant  (using your own stem cells) to rescue the bone marrow after the high-dose chemotherapy. With certain types of NHL, these treatment steps are used at first remission to try and achieve a cure. Blood transfusions or platelet transfusions may be required if blood counts are low. You and your healthcare provider may need to manage other concerns during your leukemia treatment, including: Having chemotherapy at home Managing your pets  during chemotherapy Bleeding problems Dry mouth Eating enough calories Safe eating  during cancer treatment Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Low-grade NHL often cannot be cured by chemotherapy alone. Low-grade NHL progresses slowly and may take many years before the disease gets worse or even requires treatment. The need for treatment is usually determined by symptoms, how fast the disease is progressing, and if blood counts are low. Chemotherapy may cure many types of high-grade lymphomas. If the cancer does not respond to chemotherapy, the disease can cause rapid death. Possible Complications 
 
 NHL itself and its treatments can lead to health problems. These include: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia Infection Side effects of chemotherapy drugs  Keep following up with a doctor who knows about monitoring and preventing these complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. If you have NHL, call your provider if you experience persistent fever or other signs of infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Lymphoma - non-Hodgkin; Lymphocytic lymphoma; Histiocytic lymphoma; Lymphoblastic lymphoma; Cancer - non-Hodgkin lymphoma Images 
 
 
 Lymphoma, malignant - CT scan 
 Immune system structures 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute: PDQ adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated January 25, 2016.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/adult-non-hodgkins/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Cancer Institute: PDQ childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated January 26, 2015.  cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/child-non-hodgkins/HealthProfessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Version 2.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nhl.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Roschewiski MJ, Wilson WH. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 106. Read More 
 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Cancer 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Malignancy 
 Tumor 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia