
 Noonan syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Noonan syndrome is a disease that can be passed down through families (inherited). It causes many parts of the body to develop abnormally. Causes 
 
 Noonan syndrome is linked to defects in several genes. In general, certain proteins involved in growth and development become overactive as a result of these gene changes. Noonan syndrome is an  autosomal dominant  condition. This means only one parent has to pass down the nonworking gene for the child to have the syndrome. However, some cases may not be inherited. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Delayed puberty Down-slanting or wide-set eyes Hearing loss  (varies) Low-set or abnormally shaped ears Mild intellectual disability (only in about 25% of cases) Sagging eyelids ( ptosis ) Short stature Small penis Undescended testicles Unusual chest shape (most often a sunken chest called pectus excavatum) Webbed and short-appearing neck  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show signs of heart problems the infant had from birth. These may include  pulmonary stenosis  and  atrial septal defect . Tests depend on the symptoms, but may include: Platelet count Blood clotting factor test EKG ,  chest x-ray , or echocardiogram Hearing tests Growth hormone levels  Genetic testing can help diagnose this syndrome. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment. Your provider will suggest treatment to relieve or manage symptoms. Growth hormone has been used successfully to treat short height in some persons with Noonan syndrome. Support Groups 
 
 The  Noonan Syndrome Foundation  is a place where people dealing with this condition can find information and resources.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Abnormal bleeding or bruising Buildup of fluid in tissues of body (lymphedema, cystic hygroma) Failure to thrive in infants Leukemia and other cancers Low self-esteem Infertility in males if both testes are undescended Problems with the structure of the heart Short height Social problems due to physical symptoms  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition may be found during early infant exams. A geneticist is often needed to diagnose Noonan syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Couples with a family history of Noonan syndrome may want to consider genetic counseling before having children. Images 
 
 
 Pectus excavatum 
 References 
 
 Ali O, Donohoue PA. Noonan syndrome. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 583. Allanson JE, Roberts AE. Noonan syndrome.  GeneReviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2011:11.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1124/ Read More 
 
 Eyelid drooping 
 Hearing loss 
 Intellectual disability 
 Pulmonary valve stenosis 
 
 Review Date 1/25/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia