
 Normal growth and development 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A child's growth and development can be divided into four periods: Infancy Preschool years Middle childhood years Adolescence  Soon after birth, an infant normally loses about 5% to 10% of their birth weight. By about age 2 weeks, an infant should start to gain weight and grow quickly. By age 4 to 6 months, an infant's weight should be double their birth weight. During the second half of the first year of life, growth is not as rapid. Between ages 1 and 2, a toddler will gain only about 5 pounds (2.2 kilograms). Weight gain will remain at about 5 pounds (2.2 kilograms) per year between ages 2 to 5. Between ages 2 to 10 years, a child will grow at a steady pace. A final growth spurt begins at the start of puberty, sometime between ages 9 to 15. The child's nutrient needs correspond with these changes in growth rates. An infant needs more calories in relation to size than a preschooler or school-age child needs. Nutrient needs increase again as a child gets close to adolescence. A healthy child will follow an individual growth curve. However, the nutrient intake may be different for each child. Provide a diet with a wide variety of foods that is suited to the child's age.  Healthy eating habits should begin during infancy. This can help prevent diseases such as high blood pressure and obesity. INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT AND DIET Poor nutrition  can cause problems with a child's intellectual development. A child with a poor diet may be tired and unable to learn at school. Also, poor nutrition can make the child more likely to get sick and miss school. Breakfast is very important. Children may feel tired and unmotivated if they do not eat a good breakfast. The relationship between breakfast and improved learning has been clearly shown. There are government programs in place to make sure each child has at least one healthy, balanced meal a day. This meal is usually breakfast. Programs are available in poor and underserved areas of the United States. Talk to your health care provider if you have concerns about your child's growth and development. Related topics include: Developmental milestones record - 4 months Developmental milestones record - 9 months Developmental milestones record - 12 months Developmental milestones record - 18 months Developmental milestones record - 2 years Developmental milestones record - 3 years Developmental milestones record - 4 years Developmental milestones record - 5 years Preschooler development School-age children development Puberty and adolescence  Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - intellectual development References 
 
 Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 10. Parks EP, Shaikhkhalil A, Groleau V, Wendel D, Stallings VA. Feeding healthy infants, children, and adolescents. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 45. Read More 
 
 Fatigue 
 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Child Development 
 Infant and Newborn Development 
 Toddler Development 
 Browse the Encyclopedia