
 Nuclear ventriculography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nuclear ventriculography is a test that uses radioactive materials called tracers to show the heart chambers. The procedure is  noninvasive . The instruments DO NOT directly touch the heart. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done while you are resting. The health care provider will inject a radioactive material called technetium into your vein. This substance attaches to red blood cells and passes through the heart. The red blood cells inside the heart that carry the material form an image that a special camera can pick up. These scanners trace the substance as it moves through the heart area. The camera is timed with an  electrocardiogram . A computer then processes the images to make it appear as if the heart is moving.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be told not to eat or drink for several hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a brief sting or pinch when the IV is inserted into your vein. Most often, a vein in the arm is used. You may have trouble staying still during the test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test will show how well the blood is pumping through different parts of the heart. Normal Results 
 
 Normal results show that the heart squeezing function is normal. The test can check the overall squeezing strength of the heart (ejection fraction). A normal value is above 50% to 55%. The test also can check the motion of different parts of the heart. If one part of the heart is moving poorly while the others move well, it may mean that there has been damage to that part of the heart.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Blockages in the coronary arteries ( coronary artery disease )
   Heart valve disease Other cardiac disorders that weaken the heart (reduced pumping function) Past heart attack ( myocardial infarction ) The test may also be performed for: Dilated cardiomyopathy Heart failure Idiopathic cardiomyopathy Peripartum cardiomyopathy Ischemic cardiomyopathy Testing whether a medicine has affected heart function  Risks 
 
 Nuclear imaging tests carry a very low risk. Exposure to the radioisotope delivers a small amount of radiation. This amount is safe for people who DO NOT have nuclear imaging tests often. Alternative Names 
 
 Cardiac blood pooling imaging; Heart scan - nuclear; Radionuclide ventriculography (RNV); Multiple gate acquisition scan (MUGA); Nuclear cardiology; Cardiomyopathy - nuclear ventriculography Images 
 
 
 Heart, front view 
 MUGA test 
 References 
 
 Kramer CM, Beller GA, Hagspiel KD. Noninvasive cardiac imaging. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 56. Udelson JE, Dilsizian V, Bonow RO. Nuclear cardiology. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Atrial septal defect (ASD) 
 Cardiac amyloidosis 
 Dilated cardiomyopathy 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Mitral stenosis 
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy 
 Stable angina 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Health Tests 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Browse the Encyclopedia