
 Obesity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Obesity means having too much body fat. It is not the same as being overweight, which means weighing too much. A person may be overweight from extra muscle or water, as well as from having too much fat. Both terms mean that a person's weight is higher than what is thought to be healthy for his or her height. Causes 
 
 Taking in more calories than your body burns can lead to obesity. This is because the body stores unused calories as fat. Obesity can be caused by: Eating more food than your body can use Drinking too much alcohol Not getting enough exercise  Many obese people who lose large amounts of weight and gain it back think it is their fault. They blame themselves for not having the willpower to keep the weight off. Many people regain more weight than they lost. Today, we know that biology is a big reason why some people cannot keep the weight off. Some people who live in the same place and eat the same foods become obese, while others DO NOT. Our bodies have a complex system to keep our weight at a healthy level. In some people, this system does not work normally.  The way we eat when we are children can affect the way we eat as adults.  The way we eat over many years becomes a habit. It affects what we eat, when we eat, and how much we eat.  We may feel that we are surrounded by things that make it easy to overeat and hard to stay active.  Many people feel they DO NOT have time to plan and make healthy meals. More people today work desk jobs compared to more active jobs in the past. People with little free time may have less time to exercise.  The term eating disorder means a group of medical conditions that have an unhealthy focus on eating, dieting, losing or gaining weight, and body image. A person may be obese, follow an unhealthy diet, and have an eating disorder all at the same time. Sometimes, medical problems or treatments cause weight gain, including: Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) Medicines such as birth control pills, antidepressants, and antipsychotics  Other things that can cause weight gain are: Quitting smoking. Many people who quit smoking gain 4 to 10 pounds (2 to 5 kilograms, kg) in the first 6 months after quitting. Stress, anxiety, feeling sad, or not sleeping well Menopause . Women may gain 12 to 15 pounds (5.5 to 7 kg) during menopause. Pregnancy. Women may not lose the weight they gained during pregnancy.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history, eating habits, and exercise routine. The 2 most common ways to assess your weight and measure health risks related to your weight are: Body mass index  (BMI) Waist circumference (your waist measurement in inches or centimeters)  BMI is calculated using height and weight. You and your provider can use your BMI to estimate how much body fat you have. Your waist measurement is another way to estimate how much body fat you have. Extra weight around your middle or stomach area increases your risk for type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. People with "apple-shaped" bodies (meaning they tend to store fat around their waist and have a slim lower body) also have an increased risk for these diseases. Skin fold measurements may be taken to check your body fat percentage. Blood tests may be done to look for thyroid or hormone problems that could lead to weight gain. Treatment 
 
 CHANGING YOUR LIFESTYLE  An active lifestyle and plenty of exercise, along with healthy eating, is the safest way to lose weight. Even modest weight loss can improve your health. You may need a lot of support from family and friends. Your main goal should be to learn new,  healthy ways of eating  and make them part of your daily routine. Many people find it hard to change their eating  habits and behaviors . You may have practiced some habits for so long that you may not even know they are unhealthy, or you do them without thinking. You need to be motivated to make lifestyle changes. Make the behavior change part of your life over the long term. Know that it takes time to make and keep a change in your lifestyle. Work with your provider and dietitian to set realistic, safe daily calorie counts that help you lose weight while staying healthy. Remember that if you drop pounds slowly and steadily, you are more likely to keep them off. Your dietitian can teach you about: Healthy food choices Healthy snacks Reading  nutrition labels New ways to prepare food Portion sizes Sweetened drinks  Extreme diets (fewer than 1100 calories per day) are not thought to be safe or to work very well. These types of diets often DO NOT contain enough vitamins and minerals. Most people who lose weight this way return to overeating and become obese again. Learn ways to manage stress other than snacking. Examples may be meditation, yoga, or exercise. If you are depressed or stressed a lot, talk to your provider.  MEDICINES AND HERBAL REMEDIES  You may see ads for  supplements and herbal remedies  that claim they will help you lose weight. Some of these claims may not be true. And some of these supplements can have serious side effects. Talk to your provider before using them. You can discuss weight loss medicines with your doctor. Many people lose at least 5 pounds (2 kg) by taking these drugs, but they may regain the weight when they stop taking the medicine unless they have made lifestyle changes. SURGERY  Bariatric (weight-loss) surgery can reduce the risk of certain diseases in people with severe obesity. These risks include: Arthritis Diabetes Heart disease High blood pressure Sleep apnea Some cancers Stroke  Surgery may help people who have been very obese for 5 years or more and have not lost weight from other treatments, such as diet, exercise, or medicine. Surgery alone is not the answer for weight loss. It can train you to eat less, but you still have to do much of the work. You must be committed to diet and exercise after surgery. Talk to your doctor to learn if surgery is a good option for you. Weight-loss surgeries include: Laparoscopic gastric banding Gastric bypass surgery Sleeve gastrectomy  (less common) Duodenal switch  Support Groups 
 
 Many people find it easier to follow a diet and exercise program if they join a group of people with similar problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Obesity is a major health threat. The extra weight creates many  risks to your health . Alternative Names 
 
 Morbid obesity; Fat - obese Images 
 
 
 Childhood obesity 
 Obesity and health 
 References 
 
 Cowley MA, Brown WA, Considine RV. Obesity: the problem and its management. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 26. Ding SA, Simonson DC, Wewalka M, et al. Adjustable gastric band surgery or medical management in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100(7):2546-2556. PMID: 25909333  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25909333 . Fitch A, Everling L, Fox C, et al. Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement. Prevention and management of obesity for adults. Updated May 2013.  www.icsi.org/_asset/s935hy/ObesityAdults.pdf . Accessed October 1, 2015. Kumar RB, Aronne LJ. Efficacy comparison of medications approved for chronic weight management.  Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2015;23 Suppl 1:S4-S7. PMID: 25900871  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25900871 . Kushner RF, Ryan DH. Assessment and lifestyle management of patients with obesity: clinical recommendations from systematic reviews.  JAMA . 2014;312(9):943-952. PMID: 25182103  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25182103 . Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al. Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional medical treatment in obese patients with type 2 diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label, single-centre, randomised controlled trial.  Lancet . 2015;386(9997):964-973. PMID: 26369473  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26369473 . Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for and management of obesity in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2012;157:373-378. PMID: 22733087  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22733087 .  Richards WO. Morbid obesity. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders: 2012:chap 15. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Coronary heart disease 
 Gastric bypass surgery 
 High blood pressure 
 Laparoscopic gastric banding 
 Metabolic syndrome 
 Physical activity 
 Stroke 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gastric bypass surgery - discharge  
 How to read food labels 
 Laparoscopic gastric banding - discharge  
 Your diet after gastric bypass surgery 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Obesity 
 Browse the Encyclopedia