
 Obstructive sleep apnea - adults 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a problem in which your breathing pauses during sleep. This occurs because of narrowed or blocked airways. Causes 
 
 When you sleep, all of the muscles in your body become more relaxed. This includes the muscles that help keep your throat open so air can flow into your lungs. Normally, your throat remains open enough during sleep to let air pass by. Some people have a narrow throat. When the muscles in their upper throat relax during sleep, the tissues close in and block the airway. This stop in breathing is called apnea. Loud snoring is a telltale symptom of OSA. Snoring is caused by air squeezing through the narrowed or blocked airway. Not everyone who snores has sleep apnea though. Other factors also may increase your risk: A lower jaw that is short compared to your upper jaw Certain shapes of the roof of your mouth (palate) or airway that cause it to collapse more easily Large neck or collar size, 17 inches (43 centimeters) or more in men and 16 inches (41 centimeters) or more in women Large tongue, which may fall back and block the airway Obesity Large tonsils and adenoids that can block the airway  Sleeping on your back can also cause your airway to become blocked or narrowed. Central sleep apnea  is another  sleep disorder  during which breathing can stop. It occurs when the brain temporarily stops sending signals to the muscles that control breathing. Symptoms 
 
 If you have OSA, you usually begin snoring heavily soon after falling asleep. The snoring often becomes very loud. Snoring is interrupted by a long silent period while your breathing stops. The silence is followed by a loud snort and gasp, as you attempt to breathe. This pattern repeats throughout the night.  Most people with OSA do not know their breathing starts and stops during the night. Usually, a sleep partner or other family members hear the loud snoring, gasping, and snorting. Snoring can be loud enough to hear through walls. People with sleep apnea may: Wake up unrefreshed in the morning Feel sleepy or drowsy throughout the day Act grumpy, impatient, or irritable Be forgetful Fall asleep while working, reading, or watching TV Feel sleepy while driving or even fall asleep while driving Have hard-to-treat headaches  Other problems that may occur include: Depression Hyperactive  behavior, especially in children Difficult to treat  high blood pressure Leg swelling  (if apnea is severe)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will take your medical history and do a physical exam.  Your provider will check your mouth, neck, and throat. You may be asked about daytime sleepiness, how well you sleep, and bedtime habits.  You will need to have a  sleep study  to confirm OSA. Other tests that may be performed include: Arterial blood gases Electrocardiogram  (ECG) Echocardiogram Thyroid function studies Treatment 
 
 Treatment helps keep your airway open while you sleep so your breathing does not stop. Lifestyle changes may help relieve symptoms in people with mild sleep apnea, such as: Avoid alcohol or medicines that make you sleepy before bedtime. They can make symptoms worse. Avoid sleeping on your back. Lose excess weight. Continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) devices work best to treat obstructive sleep apnea in most people. You wear a mask over your nose while you sleep. The mask is connected by a hose to a small machine that sits at the side of your bed. The machine pumps air under pressure through the hose and mask and into your airway while you sleep. This helps keep your airway open.  It can take some time to get used to sleeping with  CPAP  therapy. Good follow-up and support from a sleep center can help you overcome any problems using CPAP.  Dental devices may help some people. You wear them in your mouth while you sleep to keep your jaw forward and the airway open. Other treatments may be available, but there is less evidence that they work. It is best to talk with a doctor who specializes in sleep problems before trying them. Surgery may be an option for some people. It is often a last resort if other treatments did not work and you have severe symptoms. Surgery may be used to: Remove extra tissue at the back of the throat. Correct problems with the structures in the face. Create an opening in the windpipe to bypass the blocked airway if there are physical problems. Remove the  tonsils  and  adenoids .  Surgery may not completely cure obstructive sleep apnea and may have long-term side effects. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If not treated, sleep apnea may cause: Anxiety and depression Loss of interest in sex Poor performance at work or school  Daytime sleepiness because of sleep apnea can increase the risk of: Motor vehicle accidents from driving while sleepy Industrial accidents from falling asleep on the job  In most cases, treatment completely relieves symptoms and problems from sleep apnea. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated obstructive sleep apnea may lead to or worsen heart disease, including: Heart  arrhythmias Heart failure Heart attack High blood pressure Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You feel very tired and sleepy during the day You or your family notice symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea Symptoms do not improve with treatment, or new symptoms develop  Alternative Names 
 
 Sleep apnea - obstructive - adults; Apnea - obstructive sleep apnea syndrome - adults; Sleep-disordered breathing - adults; OSA - adults Images 
 
 
 Obstructive sleep apnea 
 References 
 
 Basner RC. Obstructive sleep apnea. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 100. Kimoff RJ. Obstructive sleep apnea. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 88. Qaseem A, Holty JE, Owens DK, Dallas P, Starkey M, Shekelle P; for the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Management of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Ann Intern Med . 2013;159(7):471-483. PMID: 24061345  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24061345 . Somers VK. Sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 75. Wakefield TL, Lam DJ, Ishman SL. Sleep apnea and sleep disorders. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 18. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulties - first aid 
 CO2 blood test 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Drowsiness 
 Gastric bypass surgery 
 High blood pressure 
 Laparoscopic gastric banding 
 Overweight 
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 Sleep disorders - overview 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Gastric bypass surgery - discharge  
 Laparoscopic gastric banding - discharge  
 Tonsil and adenoid removal - discharge 
 Weight-loss surgery - after - what to ask your doctor  
 Weight-loss surgery - before - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 1/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutger's New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sleep Apnea 
 Browse the Encyclopedia