
 Oleander poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Oleander poisoning occurs when someone eats the flowers or chews the leaves or stems of the oleander plant ( Nerium oleander ), or its relative, the yellow oleander ( Cascabela thevetia ). This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: Digitoxigenin Neriin Oleandrin Oleondroside  Note:  This list may not include all poisonous ingredients. Where Found 
 
 The poisonous substances are found in all parts of the oleander plant: 
Flowers
   
Leaves
   
Stems
   
Twigs
   Symptoms 
 
 Oleander poisoning can affect many parts of the body. HEART AND BLOOD Irregular or slow heartbeat Low blood pressure Weakness  EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Blurred vision Vision disturbances, including halos STOMACH AND INTESTINES Diarrhea Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Stomach pain  NERVOUS SYSTEM Confusion Death Depression Disorientation Dizziness Drowsiness Fainting Headache Lethargy SKIN Hives Rash  Note:  Depression, loss of appetite, and halos are most often seen in  chronic  overdose cases. Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name and part of the plant swallowed, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support Chest x-ray EKG  (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms including an antidote to reverse the effects of the poison Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 Rosebay poisoning; Yellow oleander poisoning; Thevetia peruviana poisoning Images 
 
 
 Oleander (Nerium oleander) 
 References 
 
 Graeme K. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 10/26/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia