
 Open pleural biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An open pleural biopsy is a procedure to remove and examine the tissue that lines the inside of the chest. This tissue is called the pleura. How the Test is Performed 
 
 An open pleural biopsy is done in the hospital using  general anesthesia , which means you are asleep and pain-free. A tube will be placed through your mouth down your throat to help you breathe. The surgery is done in the following way: After cleaning the skin, the surgeon makes a small cut in the left or right side of the chest. The ribs are gently separated.  Tissue is taken from inside the chest and sent to a laboratory for examination. After surgery, the wound is closed with stitches. Your surgeon may decide to leave a small plastic tube in your chest to prevent air and fluid from building up How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should tell the health care provider if you are pregnant, allergic to any medicines, or if you have a bleeding problem. Be sure to tell your provider about all the medicines you take, including herbs, supplements, and those bought without a prescription.  Follow your surgeon's instructions for not eating or drinking before the procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When you wake up after the procedure, you will feel drowsy for several hours.  There will be some tenderness and pain where the surgical cut is located. Most surgeons inject a long-acting local anesthetic at the surgical cut site so that you will have very little pain afterwards. You may have a sore throat from the breathing tube. You can ease the pain by eating ice chips. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This procedure is used when the surgeon needs a larger piece of tissue than can be removed with a  pleural needle biopsy . The test is most often done to rule out  mesothelioma . It is also done when there is fluid in the chest cavity, or when a direct view of the pleura and the lungs is needed. This procedure may also be done to examine a  metastatic pleural tumor . Normal Results 
 
 The pleura will be normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal findings may be due to: Abnormal tissue growth ( neoplasms ) Disease due to a virus, fungus, or parasite Mesothelioma Tuberculosis Risks 
 
 There is a slight chance of: Air leak Excess blood loss Infection Injury to the lung Pneumothorax Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - open pleura Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Incision for pleural tissue biopsy 
 Pleural cavity 
 References 
 
 Putnam JB Jr. Lung, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 58. Read More 
 
 Metastatic pleural tumor 
 Pleural needle biopsy 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: John A. Daller, MD, PhD., Department of Surgery, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Lung Cancer 
 Pleural Disorders 
 Tuberculosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia