
 Open heart surgery 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Heart surgery is any surgery done on the heart muscle, valves, arteries, or the aorta and other large arteries connected to the heart.  The term "open heart surgery" means that you are connected to a heart-lung bypass machine, or bypass pump during surgery. Your heart is stopped while you are connected to this machine. This machine does the work of your heart and lungs while your heart is stopped for the surgery. The machine adds oxygen to your blood, moves blood through your body, and removes carbon dioxide.  Common types of open-heart surgery include: Heart bypass surgery  (coronary artery bypass graft -- CABG) Heart valve surgery Surgery to  correct heart defect present at birth New procedures are being done on the heart through smaller cuts. Some new procedures are being done while the heart is still beating. Alternative Names 
 
 Heart surgery - open Images 
 
 
 Heart valve surgery - series 
 References 
 
 Omer S, Cornwell LD, Bakaeen FG. Acquired heart disease: coronary insufficiency. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2017:chap 59. Read More 
 
 Angioplasty and stent placement - carotid artery 
 Atrial septal defect (ASD) 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Congenital heart defect - corrective surgery 
 Heart bypass surgery 
 Heart bypass surgery - minimally invasive 
 Heart transplant 
 Heart valve surgery 
 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
 Patent ductus arteriosus 
 Pulmonary atresia 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Total anomalous pulmonary venous return 
 Ventricular septal defect 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dale Mueller, MD, cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, HeartCare Midwest; Chairman Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Surgery, OSF St. Francis Medical Center; and Clinical Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Illinois, Peoria, IL. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 11/11/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Surgery 
 Browse the Encyclopedia