
 Optic nerve atrophy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Optic nerve atrophy is damage to the optic nerve. The optic nerve carries images of what the eye sees to the brain. Causes 
 
 There are many causes of optic atrophy. The most common is poor blood flow. This is called ischemic optic neuropathy. The problem most often affects older adults. The optic nerve can also be damaged by shock, toxins, radiation, and trauma. Eye diseases, such as  glaucoma , can also cause a form of optic nerve atrophy. The condition can also be caused by diseases of the brain and central nervous system. These may include:  Brain tumor Cranial arteritis (sometimes called temporal arteritis) Multiple sclerosis Stroke There are also rare forms of hereditary optic nerve atrophy that affect children and young adults. Symptoms 
 
 Optic nerve atrophy causes vision to dim and reduces the field of vision. The ability to see fine detail will also be lost. Colors will seem faded. Over time, the pupil will be less able to react to light, and eventually, its ability to react to light may be lost.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a complete eye exam to look for the condition. The exam will include tests of: Color vision Pupil light reflex Tonometry Visual acuity  You may also need a complete  physical exam  and other tests. Treatment 
 
 Damage from optic nerve atrophy cannot be reversed. The underlying disease must be found and treated. Otherwise, vision loss will continue.  Rarely, conditions that lead to optic atrophy may be treatable. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Vision lost to optic nerve atrophy cannot be recovered. It is very important to protect the other eye. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 People with this condition need to be checked regularly by an eye doctor with experience in nerve-related conditions. Tell your doctor right away about any change in vision. Prevention 
 
 Many causes of optic nerve atrophy cannot be prevented. Prevention steps include: Older adults should have their provider carefully manage their blood pressure. Use standard safety precautions to prevent injuries to the face. Most facial injuries are the result of car accidents. Wearing seat belts may help prevent these injuries. Schedule a routine annual eye exam to check for glaucoma. Never drink home-brewed alcohol and forms of alcohol that are not intended for drinking. Methanol, which is found in home-brewed alcohol, can cause optic nerve atrophy in both eyes.  Alternative Names 
 
 Optic atrophy; Optic neuropathy Images 
 
 
 Optic nerve 
 References 
 
 Prasad S, Balcer LJ. Abnormalities of the optic nerve and retina. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 17. Purvin V, Glaser JS. Topical diagnosis: prechiasmal visual pathways. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 2, chap 5. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Brain tumor - children 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Optic Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia