
 Orchitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Orchitis is swelling (inflammation) of one or both of the  testicles . Causes 
 
 Orchitis may be caused by an infection. Many types of bacteria and viruses can cause this condition. The most common virus that causes orchitis is  mumps . It most often occurs in boys after puberty. Orchitis most often develops 4 to 6 days after the mumps begins. Mumps is now rare in the United States due to childhood vaccinations.  Orchitis may also occur along with infections of the prostate or epididymis. Orchitis may be caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) such as  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia . The rate of sexually transmitted orchitis or epididymitis is higher in men ages 19 to 35. Risk factors for sexually transmitted orchitis include: High-risk sexual behaviors Multiple sexual partners Personal history of gonorrhea or another STI Sexual partner with a diagnosed STI  Risk factors for orchitis not due to an STI include: Being older than age 45 Long-term use of a  Foley catheter Not being vaccinated against the mumps Problems of the urinary tract that were present at birth (congenital) Repeated  urinary tract infections Surgery of the urinary tract (genitourinary surgery)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Pain in the testicle Blood in the semen Discharge from penis Fever Groin pain Pain with intercourse or ejaculation Pain with urination  (dysuria) Scrotal swelling Tender, swollen groin area on affected side Tender, swollen, heavy feeling in the testicle  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show: Enlarged or tender prostate gland Tender and  enlarged lymph nodes  in the groin (inguinal) area on the affected side Tender and enlarged testicle on the affected side  Tests may include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Testicular ultrasound Tests to screen for chlamydia and gonorrhea (urethral smear) Urinalysis Urine culture (clean catch)  -- may need several samples, including initial stream, midstream, and after prostate massage  Treatment 
 
 Treatment may include: Antibiotics, if the infection is caused by bacteria. (In the case of gonorrhea or chlamydia, sexual partners must also be treated.) Anti-inflammatory medicines Pain medicines Bed rest with the scrotum elevated and ice packs applied to the area Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Getting the right diagnosis and treatment for orchitis caused by bacteria can most often allow the testicle to recover normally.  You will need further testing to rule out testicular cancer if the testicle does not completely return to normal after treatment.  Mumps orchitis cannot be treated, and the outcome can vary. Men who have had mumps orchitis can become sterile. Possible Complications 
 
 Some boys who get orchitis caused by mumps will have shrinking of the testicles (testicular atrophy). Orchitis may also cause  infertility . Other potential complications include: Chronic epididymitis Death of testicle tissue (testicular infarction) Fistula  on the skin of the scrotum (cutaneous scrotal fistula) Scrotal  abscess Acute  pain in the scrotum or testicles can be caused by twisting of the testicular blood vessels (torsion). This is a medical emergency that requires immediate surgery. A swollen testicle with little or no pain may be a sign of testicular cancer. If this is the case, you should have a testicular ultrasound.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider for an exam if you have testicle problems.  Get emergency medical help if you have sudden pain in the testicle. Prevention 
 
 Things you can do to prevent the problem include: Get vaccinated against mumps. Practice safer sex behaviors to decrease your risk of STIs. Alternative Names 
 
 Epididymo - orchitis; Testis infection Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive system 
 References 
 
 Mason WH. Mumps. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 240. McGowan CC, Krieger J. Prostatitis, epididymitis, and orchitis. In: Bennett JE, ed .  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 112. Nickel JC. Prostatitis and related conditions, orchitis, and epididymitis. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 11. Read More 
 
 Brucellosis 
 Chlamydia 
 Epididymitis 
 Infertility 
 Mumps 
 Testes 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Mumps 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia