
 Osgood-Schlatter disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osgood-Schlatter disease is a painful swelling of the bump on the upper part of the shinbone, just below the knee. This bump is called the anterior tibial tubercle. Causes 
 
 Osgood-Schlatter disease is thought to be caused by small injuries to the knee area from overuse before the knee is finished growing.  The quadriceps muscle is a large, strong muscle on the front part of the upper leg. When this muscle squeezes (contracts), it straightens the knee. The quadriceps muscle is an important muscle for running, jumping, and climbing. When the quadriceps muscle is used a lot in sports activities during a child's growth spurt, this area becomes irritated or swollen and causes pain. It is common in adolescents who play soccer, basketball, and volleyball, and who participate in gymnastics. Osgood-Schlatter disease affects more boys than girls. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is painful  swelling  over a bump on the lower leg bone (shinbone). Symptoms occur on one or both legs. You may have  leg pain  or  knee pain , which gets worse with running, jumping, and climbing stairs. The area is tender to pressure, and swelling ranges from mild to very severe. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can tell if you have this condition by doing a physical exam. A  bone x-ray  may be normal, or it may show swelling or damage to the tibial tubercle. This is a bony bump below the knee. X-rays are rarely used unless the provider wants to rule out other causes of the pain. Treatment 
 
 Osgood-Schlatter disease will almost always go away on its own once the child stops growing. Treatment includes: Resting the knee and decreasing activity when symptoms develop Putting ice over the painful area 2 to 4 times a day, and after activities Taking Ibuprofen or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or acetaminophen (Tylenol)  In many cases, the condition will get better using these methods. Adolescents may play sports if the activity does not cause too much pain. However, symptoms will get better faster when activity is limited. Sometimes, a child will need to take a break from most or all sports for 2 or more months. Rarely, a cast or brace may be used to support the leg until it heals if symptoms do not go away. This most often takes 6 to 8 weeks. Crutches may be used for walking to keep weight off the painful leg. Surgery may be needed in rare cases. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most cases get better on their own after a few weeks or months. Most cases go away once the child finished growing. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your child has knee or leg pain, or if pain does not get better with treatment. Prevention 
 
 The small injuries that may cause this disorder often go unnoticed, so prevention may not be possible. Regular stretching, both before and after exercise and athletics, can help prevent injury. Alternative Names 
 
 Osteochondrosis Images 
 
 
 Leg pain (Osgood-Schlatter) 
 References 
 
 Wells L, Sehgal K. Osgood-Schlatter Disease. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB,Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 669.4. Read More 
 
 Chronic 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Knee Injuries and Disorders 
 Sports Injuries 
 Browse the Encyclopedia