
 Osteopenia - premature infants 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteopenia is a decrease in the amount of calcium and phosphorus in the bone. This can cause bones to be weak and brittle. It increases the risk for broken bones. Causes 
 
 During the last 3 months of pregnancy, large amounts of calcium and phosphorus are transferred from the mother to the baby. This helps the baby grow. A premature infant may not receive the proper amount of calcium and phosphorus needed to form strong bones. While in the womb, fetal activity increases during the last 3 months of pregnancy. This activity is thought to be important for bone development. Most very premature infants have limited physical activity. This may also contribute to weak bones. Very premature babies lose much more phosphorus in their urine than do babies that are born full-term. A lack of vitamin D may also lead to osteopenia in infants. Vitamin D helps the body absorb calcium from the intestines and kidneys. If babies do not receive or make enough vitamin D, calcium and phosphorous will not be properly absorbed. A liver problem called cholestasis may also cause problems with vitamin D levels. Water pills (diuretics) or steroids can also cause low calcium levels. Symptoms 
 
 Most premature infants born before 30 weeks have some degree of osteopenia, but will not have any physical symptoms. Infants with severe osteopenia may have decreased movement or swelling of an arm or leg due to an unknown fracture. Exams and Tests 
 
 Osteopenia is harder to diagnose in premature infants than in adults. The most common tests used to diagnose and monitor osteopenia of prematurity include: Blood tests to check levels of calcium, phosphorus, and a protein called alkaline phosphatase Ultrasound X-rays  Treatment 
 
 Therapies that appear to improve bone strength in infants include: Calcium and phosphorus supplements, added to breast milk or IV fluids  Special premature formulas (when breast milk is not available) Vitamin D supplementation for babies with liver problems Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Fractures will most often heal well on their own with gentle handling, and increased dietary intakes of calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D. There may be an increased risk for fractures throughout the first year of life for very premature infants with this condition.  Studies have suggested that very low birth weight is a significant risk factor for osteoporosis later in adult life. It is yet unknown whether aggressive efforts to treat or prevent osteopenia of prematurity in the hospital after birth can decrease this risk.  Alternative Names 
 
 Neonatal rickets; Brittle bones - premature infants; Weak bones - premature infants; Osteopenia of prematurity References 
 
 Abrams SA, Tiosano D. Disorders of calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium metabolism in the neonate. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds.  Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 96. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Cholestasis 
 Phosphorus in diet 
 Premature infant 
 Vitamin D 
 
 Review Date 11/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Density 
 Bone Diseases 
 Premature Babies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia