
 Osteosarcoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteosarcoma is a very rare type of cancerous  bone tumor  that usually develops in teenagers. It often occurs when a teen is growing rapidly. Causes 
 
 Osteosarcoma is the most common bone cancer in children. Average age at diagnosis is 15. Boys and girls are just as likely to develop this  tumor  until the late teens, when it occurs more often in boys. Osteosarcoma is also common in people over age 60.  The cause is not known. In some cases, osteosarcoma runs in families. At least one gene has been linked to an increased risk. This gene is also associated with familial  retinoblastoma . This is a cancer of the eye that occurs in children. Osteosarcoma tends to occur in the bones of the: Shin (near the knee) Thigh (near the knee) Upper arm (near the shoulder)  Osteosarcoma occurs most commonly in large bones in the area of bone with the fastest growth rate. However, it can occur in any bone. Symptoms 
 
 The first symptom is usually bone pain near a joint. This symptom may be overlooked because of other more common causes of joint pain.  Other symptoms may include any of the following: Bone fracture (may occur after a routine movement) Limitation of motion Limping (if the tumor is in the leg) Pain when lifting (if the tumor is in the arm) Tenderness, swelling, or redness at the site of the tumor  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Biopsy  (at time of surgery for diagnosis) Blood tests Bone scan  to see if the cancer has spread to other bones CT scan  of the chest to see if the cancer has spread to the lungs MRI scan PET scan X-ray Treatment 
 
 Treatment usually starts after a biopsy of the tumor is done. Before surgery to remove the tumor,  chemotherapy  is usually given. This can shrink the tumor and make surgery easier. It may also kill any cancer cells that have spread to other parts of the body. Surgery is used after chemotherapy to remove any remaining tumor. In most cases, surgery can remove the tumor while saving the affected limb. This is called limb-sparing surgery. In rare cases, more involved surgery (amputation) is necessary. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you and your family not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the tumor has not spread to the lungs (pulmonary  metastasis ), long-term survival rates are better. If the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, the outlook is worse. However, there is still a chance of cure with effective treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Limb removal Spread of cancer to the lungs Side effects of chemotherapy  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you or your child has persistent bone pain, tenderness, or swelling. Alternative Names 
 
 Osteogenic sarcoma; Bone tumor - osteosarcoma Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Osteogenic sarcoma - x-ray 
 Ewings sarcoma - x-ray 
 Bone tumor 
 References 
 
 Anderson ME, Randall RL, Springfield DS, Gebhardt MC. Sarcomas of bone. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 92. National Cancer Institute. Osteosarcoma and malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. Cancer.gov Web site. Updated December 2, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/osteosarcoma/HealthProfessional . Accessed December 21, 2016. Read More 
 
 Bone tumor 
 Distal 
 Incidence 
 Lung metastases 
 Proximal 
 Retinoblastoma 
 Swelling 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 11/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia