
 Osteotomy of the knee 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteotomy of the knee is surgery that involves making a cut in one of the bones in your lower leg. This can be done to relieve symptoms of arthritis by realignment of your leg. Description 
 
 There are two types of surgery: Tibial osteotomy is surgery done on the shin bone below the knee cap. Femoral osteotomy is surgery done on the thigh bone above the knee cap.  During surgery: You will be pain-free during surgery. You may get  spinal or epidural anesthesia , along with medicine to help you relax. You may also receive  general anesthesia , in which you will be asleep. Your surgeon will make a 4 to 5 inch (10 to 13 centimeters) cut on the area where the osteotomy is being done. The surgeon may remove a wedge of your shinbone from underneath the healthy side of your knee. This is called a closing wedge osteotomy. The surgeon may also open a wedge on the painful side of the knee. This is called an opening wedge osteotomy. Staples, screws, or plates may be used, depending on the type of osteotomy. You may need a bone graft to fill in the wedge.  In most cases, the procedure will take 1 to 1 1/2 hours. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Osteotomy of the knee is done to treat symptoms of knee arthritis. It is done when other treatments no longer offer relief. Arthritis most often affects the inside part of the knee. Most of the time, the outside part of the knee is not affected unless you have had a knee injury in the past.  Osteotomy surgery works by shifting the weight away from the damaged part of your knee. For the surgery to be successful, the side of the knee where the weight is being shifted should have little or no arthritis. Risks 
 
 The risks for any anesthesia or surgery are: Allergic reactions to medicines Breathing problems Bleeding Infection  Other risks from this surgery include: Blood clot  in the leg Injury to a blood vessel or nerve Infection in the knee joint Knee stiffness or a knee joint that is not well-aligned Stiffness in the knee Failure of the fixation that requires more surgery  Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider which drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. During the 2 weeks before your surgery: You may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Naprosyn, Aleve), blood thinners such as warfarin (Coumadin), and other drugs. Ask your provider which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Tell your provider if you have been drinking a lot of alcohol -- more than 1 or 2 drinks a day. If you smoke, try to stop. Ask your health care providers for help. Smoking can slow down wound and bone healing.  On the day of your surgery: You will most often be asked not to drink or eat anything for 6 to 12 hours before the procedure. Take the drugs your provider told you to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 By having an osteotomy, you may be able to delay the need for a knee replacement for up to 10 years, but still stay active. A tibial osteotomy may make you look "knock-kneed." A femoral osteotomy may make you look "bow legged." Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You will be fitted with a brace to limit how much you're able to move your knee during the recovery period. The brace may also help hold your knee in the correct position. You will need to use crutches for 6 weeks or more. At first, you may be asked to not place any weight on your knee. Ask your provider when it will be OK to walk with weight on your leg that had the surgery. You will see a physical therapist to help you with an exercise program. Complete recovery may take several months to a year. Alternative Names 
 
 Proximal tibial osteotomy; Lateral closing wedge osteotomy; High tibial osteotomy; Distal femoral osteotomy Images 
 
 
 Tibial osteotomy - series 
 References 
 
 Crenshaw AH. Soft tissue procedures and corrective osteotomies about the knee. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics.  12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 9. 
 Review Date 7/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Knee Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia