
 Osteomalacia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteomalacia is softening of the bones. It most often occurs because of a problem with  vitamin D , which helps your body absorb calcium. Your body needs calcium to maintain the strength and hardness of your bones. In children, the condition is called  rickets . Causes 
 
 A lack of the proper amount of calcium leads to weak and soft bones. Vitamin D is absorbed from food or produced by the skin when exposed to sunlight. Lack of vitamin D produced by the skin may occur in people who: Live in climates with little exposure to sunlight Must stay indoors Work indoors during the daylight hours Wear clothes that cover most of their skin Have dark skin pigmentation  Use very strong sunscreen You may not get enough vitamin D from your diet if you: Are lactose intolerant (have trouble digesting milk products) Do not eat or drink milk products (more common in older adults) Follow a vegetarian diet Are not able to absorb vitamin D well in the intestines, such as after gastric bypass surgery Other conditions that may cause osteomalacia include: Cancer Kidney failure  and  acidosis Lack of enough phosphates in the diet Liver disease, and therefore cannot convert vitamin D to its active form Side effects of medicines used to treat  seizures Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Bone fractures that happen without a real injury Muscle weakness Widespread  bone pain , especially in the hips Symptoms may also occur due to low calcium level. These include: Numbness  around the mouth Numbness of the arms and legs Spasms of the hands or feet Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests will be done to check vitamin D, creatinine, calcium,  phosphate , electrolytes, alkaline phosphatase, and parathyroid hormone levels. Bone x-rays  and a  bone density test  can help detect pseudofractures, bone loss, and bone softening. More importantly, osteomalacia can look like weakening of the bones from  osteoporosis  on bone density testing. In some cases, a  bone biopsy  will be done to see if bone softening is present. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may involve vitamin D, calcium, and phosphorus supplements taken by mouth. People who cannot absorb nutrients well through the intestines may need larger doses of vitamin D and calcium. This includes people who have some types of weight loss surgery. People with certain conditions may need regular blood tests to monitor blood levels of phosphorus and calcium. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Some people with vitamin deficiency disorders will get better within a few weeks. With treatment, healing should happen within 6 months. Possible Complications 
 
 Symptoms can return. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of osteomalacia, or if you think that you may be at risk for this disorder. Prevention 
 
 Eating a diet rich in vitamin D and getting plenty of sunlight and calcium can help prevent osteomalacia due to a vitamin D deficiency. Alternative Names 
 
 Vitamin D deficiency - osteomalacia; Calcium - osteomalacia Images 
 
 
 Diseased hip 
 References 
 
 Bringhurst FR, Demay MB, Kronenberg HM. Hormones and disorders of mineral metabolism. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 28. Demay MB, Krane SM. Disorders of mineralization. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 71. Weinstein RS. Osteomalacia and rickets. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 244. Read More 
 
 Acidosis 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Lactose intolerance 
 Malabsorption 
 Rickets 
 Seizures 
 Vitamin D 
 
 Review Date 5/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Vitamin D Deficiency 
 Browse the Encyclopedia