
 
 
 
 Painful swallowing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
    			Swallowing pain is any pain or discomfort while swallowing. You may feel it high in the neck or lower down behind the breastbone. Most often, the pain feels like a strong sensation of squeezing or burning. Swallowing pain may be a symptom of a serious disorder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Considerations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swallowing involves many nerves and muscles in the mouth, throat area, and esophagus (the tube that moves food to the stomach). Part of swallowing is voluntary, which means you are aware of controlling the action. However, much of swallowing is involuntary. 
 
 
 Watch this video about: Swallowing 
 
 
 Problems at any point in the swallowing process (including chewing, moving food to the back of the mouth, or moving it to the stomach) can result in painful swallowing. Swallowing problems can cause symptoms such as: 
 
 Chest pain 
 Feeling of food stuck in the throat 
 Heaviness or pressure in the neck or upper chest while eating 
 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swallowing problems may be due to infections, such as: 
 
 Cytomegalovirus 
 Gum disease ( gingivitis ) 
 Herpes simplex virus 
 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
 Pharyngitis  (sore throat) 
 Thrush 
 
 Swallowing problems may be due to a problem with the esophagus, such as: 
 
 Achalasia 
 Esophageal spasms 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 Inflammation of the esophagus 
 Nutcracker esophagus 
 Ulcer in the esophagus, especially due to the antibiotic doxycycline 
 
 Other causes of swallowing problems include: 
 
 Mouth or throat ulcers 
 Something stuck in the throat (for example, fish or chicken bones) 
 Tooth infection or abscess 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home Care 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 To ease swallowing pain: 
 
 Eat slowly and chew food well. 
 Eat pureed foods or liquids if solid foods are hard to swallow. 
 Avoid very cold or very hot foods if they make your symptoms worse. 
 
 If someone is choking, immediately perform the  Heimlich maneuver . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have painful swallowing and: 
 
 Blood in your stools or your stools appear black or tarry 
 Shortness of breath or lightheadedness 
 Weight loss 
 
 Tell your provider about any other symptoms that occur with the painful swallowing, including: 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Chills 
 Cough 
 Fever 
 Heartburn 
 Nausea or vomiting 
 Sour taste in the mouth 
 Wheezing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including: 
 
 Do you have pain when swallowing solids, liquids, or both? 
 Is the pain constant or does it come and go? 
 Is the pain getting worse? 
 Do you have difficulty swallowing? 
 Do you have a sore throat? 
 Does it feel like there is a lump in your throat? 
 Have you inhaled or swallowed any irritating substances? 
 What other symptoms do you have? 
 What other health problems do you have? 
 What medicines do you take? 
 
 The following tests may be done: 
 
 Barium swallow  and upper GI series 
 Chest x-ray 
 Esophageal pH monitoring (measures acid in the esophagus) 
 Esophageal manometry (measures pressure in the esophagus) 
 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD) 
 HIV testing 
 Neck x-ray 
 Throat culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swallowing - pain or burning; Odynophagia; Burning feeling when swallowing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Falk GW, Katzka DA. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 138. Kahrilas PJ, Pandolfino JE. Esophageal neuromuscular function and motility disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 43. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Nutritional Support 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Swallowing Disorders 
 Read more       
   
 
