
 Paleness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Paleness is an abnormal loss of color from normal skin or  mucous membranes . Considerations 
 
 Unless pale skin is accompanied by pale lips, tongue, palms of the hands, inside of the mouth, and lining of the eyes, it is probably not a serious condition, and does not require treatment. General paleness affects the entire body. It is most easily seen on the face, lining of the eyes, inner mouth, and nails. Local paleness usually affects a single limb. How easily paleness is diagnosed varies with skin color, and the thickness and amount of blood vessels in the tissue under the skin. Sometimes it is only a lightening of skin color. Paleness may be difficult to detect in a dark-skinned person, and is detected only in the eye and mouth lining. Causes 
 
 Paleness may be the result of decreased blood supply to the skin. It can also be due to decreased number of red blood cells (anemia). Paleness of the skin is not the same as loss of pigment from the skin. Paleness is related to blood flow in the skin rather than deposit of melanin in the skin. Paleness can be caused by: Normal fair complexion Anemia  ( blood loss , poor nutrition, or underlying disease) Problems with the circulatory system Shock Fainting Frostbite Low blood sugar Chronic  (long-term) diseases including infection and  cancer Certain medicines  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or emergency number if a person suddenly develops generalized paleness. Emergency action may be needed to maintain proper blood circulation. Also call your provider if paleness is accompanied by shortness of breath, blood in the stool, or other unexplained symptoms. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms, including:  Did the paleness develop suddenly? Did it happen after reminders of a  traumatic event ? Are you pale all over or only in one part of the body? If so, where? What other symptoms do you have? For example, do you have pain,  shortness of breath ,  blood in the stool , or are you  vomiting blood ? Do you have a pale arm, hand, leg or foot, and cannot feel a  pulse  in the area?  Tests that may be ordered include: Extremity arteriography CBC  (complete blood count) Blood differential Treatment will depend on the cause of paleness. Alternative Names 
 
 Skin - pale or gray; Pallor Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 High WA, Tomasini CF, Argenziano G, Zalaudek I. Basic principles of dermatology. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 1. Schwarzenberger K, Callen JP. Dermatologic manifestations in patients with systemic disease. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 53. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Fainting 
 Low blood sugar 
 Mucosa 
 Shock 
 Subcutaneous 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia