
 Palpebral slant - eye 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The palpebral slant is the direction of the slant of a line that goes from the outer corner of the eye to the inner corner. Considerations 
 
 The palpebral are the upper and lower eyelids, which make up the shape of the eye. A line drawn from the inner corner to the outer corner determines the slant of the eye, or palpebral slant. Slanting and a fold of skin ( epicanthal fold ) are normal in people of Asian descent. Abnormal slanting of the eye may occur with some genetic disorders and syndromes. The most common of these is Down syndrome. People with Down syndrome often also have an epicanthal fold in the inner corner of the eye. Causes 
 
 Palpebral slant may not be part of any other defect. However, in some cases, it may be due to: Down syndrome Fetal alcohol syndrome Certain genetic disorders When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: Your infant has abnormal features of the face You are worried about your infant's ability to move their eyes You notice any abnormal color, swelling, or discharge from your infant's eyes  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your child's medical history and symptoms. An infant with an abnormal palpebral slant will usually have other symptoms of another health condition. That condition will be diagnosed based on a family history, medical history, and a physical exam. Tests to confirm a disorder may include: Chromosome studies Enzyme  assays Metabolic studies X-rays Alternative Names 
 
 Mongolian slant Images 
 
 
 Palpebral slant 
 References 
 
 Dollfus H, Verloes A. Developmental anomalies of the lids. In: Hoyt CS, Taylor D, eds.  Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus . 4th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 18. Haldeman-Englert CR, Saitta SC, Zackai EH. Specific chromosome disorders in newborns. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 20. Read More 
 
 Epicanthal folds 
 
 Review Date 4/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eyelid Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia