
 Pancreatic abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pancreatic abscess is an area filled with pus within the pancreas. Causes 
 
 Pancreatic  abscesses  develop in people who have  pancreatic pseudocysts  that become infected. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal mass Abdominal pain Chills Fever Inability to eat Nausea and vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Most people with pancreatic abscesses have had pancreatitis. However, the complication often takes 7 or more days to develop. Signs of an abscess can be seen on: CT scan  of the abdomen MRI of the abdomen Ultrasound  of the abdomen  Treatment 
 
 It may be possible to drain the abscess through the skin (percutaneous). Abscess drainage can be done through an endoscope using endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) in some cases. Surgery to drain the abscess and remove dead tissue is often needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on how severe the infection is. The death rate from undrained pancreatic abscesses is very high. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Multiple abscesses Sepsis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have abdominal pain with fever or other signs of a pancreatic abscess, especially if you have recently had a pancreatic pseudocyst or pancreatitis. Prevention 
 
 Draining a pancreatic pseudocyst may help prevent some cases of pancreatic abscess. However, in many cases the disorder is not preventable. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Endocrine glands 
 Pancreas 
 References 
 
 Barshak MB. Pancreatic infection. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 78. Forsmark CE. Pancreatitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 144. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Pancreatic pseudocyst 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia