
 Parainfluenza 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Parainfluenza refers to a group of viruses that lead to upper and lower respiratory infections. Causes 
 
 There are four types of parainfluenza virus. They can all cause lower or  upper respiratory infections  in adults and children. The virus can cause  croup ,  bronchiolitis ,  bronchitis  and certain types of pneumonia. The exact number of parainfluenza cases is unknown. The number is suspected to be very high. Infections are most common in fall and winter. Parainfluenza infections are most severe in infants and become less severe with age. By school age, most children have been exposed to the parainfluenza virus. Most adults have antibodies against parainfluenza, although they can get repeat infections. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary depending on the type of infection. Cold-like symptoms consisting of a runny nose and mild cough are common. Life-threatening respiratory symptoms can be seen in young infants with bronchiolitis and those with weak immune system. In general, symptoms may include: Sore throat Fever Runny or stuffy nose Chest pain, shortness of breath,  wheezing Cough or croup Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show sinus tenderness, swollen glands, and a red throat. The health care provider will listen to the lungs and chest with a stethoscope. Abnormal sounds, such as crackling or wheezing, may be heard. Tests that may be done include: Arterial blood gases Blood cultures  (to rule out other causes of pneumonia) Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Complete blood count (CBC) Swab of nose for rapid viral test Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for the viral infection. Certain treatments are available for the symptoms of croup and bronchiolitis to make breathing easier.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most infections in adults and older children are mild and recovery takes place without treatment, unless the person is very old or has an abnormal immune system. Medical intervention may be necessary if  breathing difficulties  develop. Possible Complications 
 
 Secondary bacterial infections are the most common complication.  Airway obstruction  in croup and bronchiolitis can be severe and even life threatening. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You or your child develops croup, wheezing, or any other type of breathing difficulty. A child under 18 months develops any type of upper respiratory symptom. Prevention 
 
 There are no vaccines available for parainfluenza. A few preventive measures that may help include: Avoiding crowds to limit exposure during peak outbreaks Washing your hands often. Limiting exposure to day care centers and nurseries, if possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Human parainfluenza virus; HPIVs  References 
 
 Ison MG. Parainfluenza viruses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 158. Weinberg GA, Edwards KM. Parainfluenza viral disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 363. Yogev R, Hall CB. Parainfluenza viruses. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 178. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Bronchiolitis 
 Bronchitis - acute 
 Common cold 
 Croup 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Croup 
 Viral Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia