
 Parapneumonic pleural effusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pleural effusion  is a buildup of fluid in the pleural space. The pleural space is the area between the layers of the tissue lining the lung and the chest cavity. With parapneumonic pleural effusion, the fluid buildup is caused  pneumonia . Causes 
 
 Pneumonia, most commonly from bacteria, causes parapneumonic pleural effusion. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can include any of the following: Chest pain, usually a sharp pain that is worse with cough or deep breaths Cough with sputum Fever Rapid breathing Shortness of breath Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. The provider will also listen to your lungs with a stethoscope and tap (percuss) your chest and upper back. The following tests may help to confirm a diagnosis: Complete blood count (CBC) blood test Chest CT scan Chest x-ray Thoracentesis  (a sample of fluid is removed with a needle inserted between the ribs) Ultrasound of the chest and heart Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are prescribed to treat the pneumonia. If the person has shortness of breath, thoracentesis might be used to drain the fluid. If better drainage of the fluid is needed due to more severe infection, a drain tube can be inserted. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition improves when the pneumonia improves. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Lung damage Infection that turns into an abscess, called an  empyema , which will need to be drained with a chest tube Collapsed lung ( pneumothorax ) after thoracentesis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of pleural effusion. Call your provider or go to the emergency room if shortness of breath or difficulty breathing occurs right after thoracentesis. Alternative Names 
 
 Pleural effusion - pneumonia Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Nicks BA, Manthey DE. Pleural effusion. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 52. Septimus EJ. Pleural effusion and empyema. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 70. Read More 
 
 Pleural effusion 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia