
 Paraffin poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Paraffin is a solid waxy substance used to make candles and other items. This article discusses what may occur if you swallow or eat paraffin. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Paraffin Where Found 
 
 Some arthritis bath/spa treatments Some  candles Some waxes  Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Eating a lot of paraffin can lead to  intestinal obstruction,  which can cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and possible constipation. If the paraffin contains a dye, a person who has an allergy to that dye may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing. Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make the person throw up. Contact poison control for help. If the person has an allergic reaction, call 911 or your local emergency number. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive: Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Mild laxatives to help move the paraffin through the intestine and be removed from the body If an allergic reaction occurs, the person may need: Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Paraffin is usually nontoxic (not harmful) if swallowed in small amounts. Recovery is likely. The person will likely be asked to drink large amounts of fluids to help remove the paraffin from the bowel. This will help reduce the risk of complications. Alternative Names 
 
 Wax poisoning - paraffin References 
 
 Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 147. Shannon MW. Emergency management of poisoning. In: Shannon MW, ed.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 2. 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia