
 Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome is an eye problem that is similar to conjunctivitis ("pink eye"). It most often affects only one eye. It occurs with  swollen lymph nodes  and an illness with a fever. Note: Parinaud syndrome (also called upgaze paresis) is a different disorder in which you have trouble looking up. This can be caused by a brain tumor, and requires an immediate evaluation by your health care provider. Causes 
 
 Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome (POS) is caused by an infection with bacteria, a virus, fungus, or parasite. The most common causes are cat scratch disease and  tularemia  (rabbit fever). The bacteria that cause either condition can infect the eye. The bacteria can directly enter the eye (on a finger or other object), or air droplets that carry the bacteria can land on the eye. Other infectious diseases may spread the same way, or through the bloodstream to the eye. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Red, irritated, and painful eye (looks like "pink eye") Fever General ill feeling Increased tearing (possible) Swelling of nearby lymph glands (often in front of the ear)  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam shows: Fever and other signs of illness Red, tender, inflamed eye Tender lymph nodes may be present in front of the ear There may be growths (conjunctival nodules) on the inside of the eyelid or the white of the eye  Blood tests will be done to check for infection. The  white blood cell  count may be high or low, depending on the cause of the infection. A blood test to check antibody levels is the main method used to diagnose many of the infections that cause POS. Other tests may include: Biopsy of the lymph node Laboratory culture of eye fluids, lymph node tissue, or blood  Treatment 
 
 Depending on the cause of the infection, antibiotics may be helpful. Surgery may be needed in rare cases to clean away the infected tissues. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook depends on the cause of the infection. In general, if the diagnosis is made early and treatment starts right away, the outcome of POS can be very good. Possible Complications 
 
 Serious complications are rare. The conjunctival nodules can sometimes form sores (ulcers) during the healing process. The infection can spread to nearby tissues or into the bloodstream. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 You should call your health care provider if you develop a red, irritated, painful eye. Prevention 
 
 Frequent hand washing can reduce the likelihood of getting POS. Avoid being scratched by a cat, even a healthy cat. You can avoid tularemia by not having contact with wild rabbits, squirrels, or ticks. Alternative Names 
 
 Cat scratch disease; Oculoglandular syndrome Images 
 
 
 Swollen lymph node 
 References 
 
 Rolain J-M, Raoult D. Bartonella infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 315. Rubenstein JB, Tannan A. Conjunctivitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4.6. Read More 
 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 Tularemia 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia