
 Parkinson disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Parkinson disease causes certain brain cells to die. These are the cells that help control movement and coordination. The disease leads to shaking ( tremors ) and  trouble walking and moving . Causes 
 
 Nerve cells use a brain chemical called dopamine to help control muscle movement. With Parkinson disease, the brain cells that make  dopamine  slowly die. Without dopamine, the cells that control movement cannot send messages to the muscles. This makes it hard to control the muscles. Slowly, over time, this damage gets worse. No one knows what causes these brain cells to waste away. Parkinson disease most often develops after age 50. It is one of the most common nervous system problems in older adults. The disease tends to affect men more than women, although women also develop the disease. Parkinson disease sometimes runs in families. The disease can occur in younger adults. In such cases, it is often due to the person's genes. Parkinson disease is rare in children.  Watch this video about: Parkinson disease Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may be mild at first. For instance, you may have a mild tremor or a slight feeling that one leg is stiff and dragging. Symptoms may affect one or both sides of the body. General symptoms may include: Problems with balance and walking Rigid or stiff muscles Muscle aches  and pains Low blood pressure when you stand up Stooped posture Constipation Sweating and not being able to control your body temperature Slow blinking Difficulty swallowing Drooling Slowed, quieter speech and monotone voice No expression in your face (like you are wearing a mask)  Movement problems may include:  Difficulty starting movement, such as starting to walk or getting out of a chair Difficulty continuing to move Slowed movements Loss of small hand movements (writing may become small and difficult to read) Difficulty eating  Symptoms of shaking (tremors): Usually occur when your limbs are not moving; this is called resting tremor Occur when your arm or leg is held out Go away when you move May be worse when you are tired, excited, or stressed Can cause you to rub your finger and thumb together without meaning to (called pill-rolling tremor) Eventually may occur in your head, lips, tongue, and feet  Other symptoms may include: Anxiety, stress, and tension Confusion Dementia Depression Fainting Memory loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may be able to diagnose Parkinson disease based on your symptoms and a physical exam. But the symptoms can be hard to pin down, particularly in older adults. Symptoms are easier to recognize as the illness gets worse. The examination may show: Difficulty starting or finishing a movement Jerky, stiff movements Muscle loss Shaking (tremors) Changes in your heart rate Normal muscle reflexes  Your doctor may do some tests to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms.  Treatment 
 
 There is no cure for Parkinson disease, but treatment can help control your symptoms. MEDICINE Your provider will prescribe medicines to help control your shaking and movement symptoms.  At certain times during the day, the medicine may wear off and symptoms can return. If this happens, your provider may need to change any of the following: Type of medicine Dose Amount of time between doses The way you take the medicine You may also need to take medicines to help with: Mood and thinking problems Pain relief Sleep problems Drooling (botulinum toxin is often used) Parkinson medicines can cause severe side effects, including: Confusion Seeing or hearing things that are not there ( hallucinations ) Nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea Feeling lightheaded or fainting Behaviors that are hard to control, such as gambling Delirium Tell your provider right away if you have these side effects. Never change or stop taking any medicines without talking with your provider. Stopping some medicines for Parkinson disease may lead to a severe reaction. Work with your provider to find a treatment plan that works for you. As the disease gets worse, symptoms such as stooped posture, frozen movements, and speech problems may not respond to the medicines. SURGERY Surgery may be an option for some people. Surgery does not cure Parkinson disease, but it may help ease symptoms. Types of surgery include: Deep brain stimulation . This involves placing electric stimulators in areas of the brain that control movement. Surgery to destroy brain tissue that causes Parkinson symptoms. Stem cell transplant and other procedures are being studied. LIFESTYLE Certain  lifestyle changes  may help you cope with Parkinson disease: Stay healthy by eating nutritious foods and not smoking. Make changes in what you eat or drink if you have  swallowing problems . Use speech therapy to help you adjust to changes in your swallowing and speech. Stay active as much as possible when you feel good. DO NOT overdo it when your energy is low. Rest as needed during the day and avoid stress. Use physical therapy and occupational therapy to help you stay independent and reduce the risk of falls. Place handrails throughout your house to help  prevent falls . Place them in bathrooms and along stairways. Use assistive devices, when needed, to make movement easier. These devices may include special eating utensils, wheelchairs, bed lifts, shower chairs, and walkers. Talk to a social worker or other counseling service to help you and your family cope with the disorder. These services can also help you get outside help, such as Meals on Wheels. Support Groups 
 
 Parkinson disease support groups  can help you cope with the changes caused by the disease. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Medicines can help most people with Parkinson disease. How well medicines relieve symptoms and for how long, can be different in each person.  If not treated, the disorder gets worse until a person is totally disabled. Parkinson disease may lead to a decline in brain function and early death. Possible Complications 
 
 Parkinson disease may cause problems such as: Difficulty performing daily activities Difficulty swallowing or eating Disability (differs from person to person) Injuries from falls Pneumonia  from breathing in saliva or from choking on food Side effects of medicines When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of Parkinson disease Symptoms get worse New symptoms occur If you take medicines for Parkinson disease, tell your provider about any side effects, which may include: Changes in alertness, behavior, or mood Delusional behavior Dizziness Hallucinations Involuntary movements Loss of mental functions Nausea and vomiting Severe confusion or disorientation Also call your provider if the condition gets worse and home care is no longer possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Paralysis agitans; Shaking palsy Images 
 
 
 Substantia nigra and Parkinson disease 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 American Parkinson Disease Association. Parkinson's Disease Handbook: A Guide for Patients and Their Families. Updated 2009.  www.apdaparkinson.org/uploads/files/MP51919AmParkinsonHBK-vaU.pdf . Accessed September 15, 2015. Connolly BS, Lang AE. Pharmacological treatment of Parkinson disease: a review.  JAMA . 2014;311(16):1670-1683. PMID: 24756517  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24756517 . Jankovic J. Parkinson disease and other movement disorders. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 96. Odekerken VJ, Boel JA, Schmand BA, et al. GPi vs STN deep brain stimulation for Parkinson disease: Three-year follow-up.  Neurology . 2016;86(8):755-761. PMID: 26819458  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26819458 . Read More 
 
 Catecholamine blood test 
 Dementia 
 Muscle cramps 
 Secondary parkinsonism 
 Walking abnormalities 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Eating extra calories when sick - adults 
 Swallowing problems  
 Review Date 8/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Division of Neurology, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parkinson's Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia