
 Pelvis x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pelvis  x-ray  is a picture of the bones around both the hips. The pelvis connects the legs to the body. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a radiology department or in the health care provider's office by an x-ray technician. You will lie down on the table. The pictures are then taken. You will change your body to other positions to provide different views. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the provider if you are pregnant. Remove all jewelry. You will wear a hospital gown. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-rays are painless. Changing position may cause discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The x-ray is used to look for: Fractures Tumors Degenerative conditions of bones in the hips, pelvis, and upper legs What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may suggest: Pelvic fractures Arthritis of the hip joint Tumors of the bones of the pelvis Sacroiliitis (inflammation of the area where the sacrum joins the ilium bone) Ankylosing spondylitis  (abnormal stiffness of the spine and joint) Risks 
 
 Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - pelvis Images 
 
 
 Sacrum 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Mettler FA. Skeletal system. In: Mettler FA, ed.  Essentials of Radiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 8. Telhan R, Kelly BT, Moley PJ. Hip and pelvis overuse syndromes. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Ankylosing spondylitis 
 Broken bone 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ankylosing Spondylitis 
 Hip Injuries and Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia