
 Pentazocine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pentazocine is a medicine used to treat moderate to severe pain. A pentazocine overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Pentazocine Where Found 
 
 Pentazocine is found in: Algopent Fortral Fortulgesic Litcon Pentafen Talwin Nx  This list is not all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 In most opioid poisonings, the person will have signs of opioid intoxication. Opioids are powerful painkillers. Symptoms may include: Bluish skin color (cyanosis) Breathing difficulty Constipation Dizziness Drowsiness Dry mouth Headache Rapid heartbeat and blood pressure changes Pinpoint pupils Seizures Stomach cramps Vomiting  Pentazocine is a weak opioid. It may cause opioid withdrawal symptoms in people who use it as a substitute for stronger formulations. Symptoms of withdrawal may include: Anxiety and restlessness Diarrhea Goose bumps Rapid heart rate Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms, including naloxone (Narcan), an antidote to help reverse the effect of the poison, multiple doses may be needed  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pentazocine overdose is usually much less serious than other opioid medicine overdoses, such as heroin and morphine. Rarely do antidotes, such as Narcan, need to be used. Although deaths have been reported, most people who receive immediate treatment should recover well. Alternative Names 
 
 Talwin; Alupent; Fortal; Pentafen; Fortulgesic; Litcon References 
 
 Bardsley CH. Opioids. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 162. Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. 
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia