
 Pentobarbital overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pentobarbital is a sedative, which is a medicine that makes you sleepy. Pentobarbital overdose occurs when a person intentionally or accidentally takes too much of the medicine. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Pentobarbital Where Found 
 
 Pentobarbital is the generic name for the following medicines: Nembutal Pentosol Repocal Sopental Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a pentobarbital overdose may include: Coma Confusion Decreased energy Delirium  (confusion and agitation) Difficulty breathing Headache Large blisters Rash Sleepiness Slowed or stopped breathing Slurred speech Unsteady gait  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  People who still have symptoms after 6 hours of treatment may need to be admitted to the hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. With proper treatment, people can recover in 1 to 5 days. If the person was in a coma or in shock long-term (causing damage to many internal organs), a more serious outcome is possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Nembutal overdose; Pentosol overdose; Sopental overdose; Repocal overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Gussow L, Carlson A. Sedative hypnotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 165. 
 Review Date 1/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia