
 Peppermint oil overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Peppermint oil is an oil made from the peppermint plant. Peppermint oil overdose occurs when someone swallows more than the normal or recommended amount of this product. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Menthol is the ingredient in peppermint oil that can be poisonous in large amounts. Where Found 
 
 Peppermint oil is used to flavor various products. It is also used: As a germ-killing (antiseptic) product As a numbing product (anesthetic) In herbal medicine to relieve spasms Other products may also contain peppermint oil. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of a peppermint oil  overdose  in different parts of the body. HEART AND BLOOD Slow  heartbeat LUNGS Shallow breathing Slow breathing Rapid breathing STOMACH AND INTESTINES Abdominal pain Diarrhea Nausea Vomiting KIDNEYS AND BLADDER Blood in urine No urine production NERVOUS SYSTEM Convulsions Depression Dizziness Twitching Unconsciousness Uncoordinated movement SKIN Redness Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (by IV) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Tube down the windpipe and lungs to look for damage and burns (bronchoscopy) Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on the amount of peppermint oil swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance is for recovery. Survival past 48 hours is often a good sign that recovery will occur. If the kidneys are damaged, they may take several months to heal. Long-term injury to the lungs can also occur. References 
 
 Jeske AH. Complementary and alternative medications and dietary supplements. In: Jeske AH, ed.  Mosby's Dental Drug Reference . 11th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap h. Maypole J, Woolf AD. Essential oils. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 101. Murray MT. Mentha piperita (peppermint). In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.  Textbook of Natural Medicine . 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2013:chap 105. Nair B. Final report on the safety assessment of mentha piperita (peppermint) oil, mentha piperita (peppermint) leaf extract, mentha piperita (peppermint) leaf, and mentha piperita (peppermint) leaf water.  Int J Toxicol . 2001;20 Suppl 3:61-73. 
PMID: 11766133  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11766133 . 
 Review Date 10/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia