
 Peritonitis - spontaneous bacterial 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The peritoneum is the thin tissue that lines the inner wall of the abdomen and covers most of the organs. Peritonitis is present when this tissue becomes inflamed or infected. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is present when this tissue becomes infected and there is no clear cause. Causes 
 
 SBP is most often caused by infection in fluid that collects in the peritoneal cavity ( ascites ). The fluid buildup often occurs with advanced liver or kidney disease. Risk factors for liver disease include: Very heavy alcohol use  Chronic  hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C Other diseases that lead to cirrhosis SBP also occurs in people who are on peritoneal dialysis for kidney failure.  Peritonitis may have other causes . These include infection from other organs or leakage of enzymes or other toxins into the abdomen. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abdominal pain  and bloating Abdominal  tenderness Fever Low urine output Other symptoms include: Chills Joint pain Nausea and vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests will be done to check for infection and other causes of abdominal pain: Blood culture 
  White blood cell count in a sample of peritoneal fluid
   
  Chemical examination of peritoneal fluid
   Culture of peritoneal fluid CT scan or ultrasound of the abdomen  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the  SBP . 
   Surgery may be needed if SBP is caused by a foreign object, such as a catheter used in  peritoneal dialysis .
    Antibiotics to control infection. Fluids given through the veins .
    You will need to stay in the hospital so health care providers can rule out other causes such as a ruptured appendix and  diverticulitis . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, the infection can be treated. However, kidney or  liver disease  may limit recovery. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Loss of brain function  occurs when the liver is unable to remove toxins from the blood. Kidney problem caused by liver failure . Sepsis . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of peritonitis. This can be a medical emergency situation. Prevention 
 
 Steps should be taken to prevent infection in people with peritoneal catheters. Antibiotics may be used: To prevent peritonitis from coming back in people with liver failure To prevent peritonitis in people who have acute gastrointestinal bleeding due to other conditions Alternative Names 
 
 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP); Ascites - peritonitis; Cirrhosis - peritonitis Images 
 
 
 Peritoneal sample 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tiso G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 153. Kuemmerle JF. Inflammatory and anatomic diseases of the intestine, peritoneum, mesentery, and omentum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 142. Runyon BA. Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 93. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Ascites 
 Cirrhosis 
 Hepatorenal syndrome 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Loss of brain function - liver disease 
 Sepsis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dialysis 
 Kidney Failure 
 Liver Diseases 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia