
 Periactin overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Periactin is an antihistamine, which is a drug used to relieve allergy symptoms. A periactin overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this drug. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Cyproheptadine Where Found 
 
 The generic drug name for Periactin is cyproheptadine hydrochloride. This medicine may also be sold under the following brand names: Klarivitina Nuran Periatinol This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of periactin overdose may include: Agitation Coma Confusion Delirium Depression Dilated pupils Disorientation Drowsiness Excitation Flushed skin Hallucinations Nervousness Rapid heartbeat Seizures Unsteadiness Urinary hesitancy, inability to urinate  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the person lives the first 24 hours, survival is likely. People with an irregular heart rhythm and seizures are at highest risk for a serious outcome. Few people actually die from an antihistamine overdose. Alternative Names 
 
 Cyproheptadine hydrochloride overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Velez LI, Seng Y-F. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150. 
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cold and Cough Medicines 
 Browse the Encyclopedia