
 Pericardiocentesis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pericardiocentesis is a procedure that uses a needle to remove fluid from the pericardial sac. This is the tissue that surrounds the heart. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The procedure is most often done in a special procedure room, such as a cardiac catheterization laboratory. It may also be done at a patient's hospital bedside. A health care provider will put an  IV  into your arm in case fluids or medicines need to be given through a vein. For example, you may be given medicines if your heartbeat slows or your blood pressure drops during the procedure. The provider will clean an area just below or next to the breastbone or below the left nipple. Numbing medicine (anesthetic) will be applied to the area. The doctor will then insert a needle and guide it into tissue that surrounds the heart. Often,  echocardiography  (ultrasound) is used to help the doctor see the needle and any fluid drainage. An electrocardiogram ( ECG ) and x-rays (fluoroscopy) may also be used to help with positioning. Once the needle has reached the correct area, it is removed and replaced with a tube called a catheter. Fluid drains through this tube into containers. Most of the time, the pericardial catheter is left in place so draining may continue for several hours. Surgical drainage may be needed if the problem is hard to correct or comes back. This is a more invasive procedure in which the pericardium is drained into the peritoneal (abdominal) or chest (pleural) cavity. This may need to be done when you are under general anesthesia.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may not be able to eat or drink for 6 hours before the test. You must sign a consent form. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel pressure as the needle enters. Some people have  chest pain , which may require pain medicine. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to remove and examine fluid that is pressing on the heart. It is most often done to find the cause of a chronic or recurrent  pericardial effusion . It may also be done to treat  cardiac tamponade , which is a life-threatening condition. Normal Results 
 
 There is normally a small amount of clear, straw-colored fluid in the pericardial space. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal findings may indicate the cause of pericardial fluid accumulation, such as: Cancer Cardiac perforation Cardiac trauma Congestive heart failure Pericarditis Renal failure Infection Rupture of a ventricular  aneurysm Risks 
 
 Risks may include: Bleeding Collapsed lung Heart attack Infection (pericarditis) Irregular heartbeats ( arrhythmias ) Puncture of the heart muscle, coronary artery, lung, liver, or stomach Pneumopericardium (air in the pericardial sac)  Alternative Names 
 
 Pericardial tap; Percutaneous pericardiocentesis; Pericarditis - pericardiocentesis; Pericardial effusion - pericardiocentesis Images 
 
 
 Heart, front view 
 Pericardium 
 References 
 
 LeWinter MM, Hopkins WE. Pericardial diseases. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 71. Little WC, Oh JK. Pericardial diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 77. Read More 
 
 Aneurysm 
 Cancer 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Pericarditis 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pericardial Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia