
 Peritoneal fluid culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Peritoneal fluid culture is a laboratory test performed on a sample of peritoneal fluid to detect bacteria or fungi that cause infection ( peritonitis ). Peritoneal fluid is the fluid from the peritoneal cavity, a space between the wall of the abdomen and the organs inside. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample of peritoneal fluid is needed. This sample is obtained using a procedure called an  abdominal tap  (paracentesis).  A sample of fluid is sent to the laboratory for Gram stain and culture. The sample is checked to see if bacteria grows. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Empty your bladder before your abdominal tap procedure. How the Test will Feel 
 
 A small area in your lower abdomen will be cleaned with germ-killing medicine (antiseptic). You will also receive local anesthesia. You will feel pressure as the needle is inserted. If a large amount of fluid is withdrawn, you may feel dizzy or lightheaded. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to find out if there is an infection in the peritoneal space. Normal Results 
 
 Peritoneal fluid is a sterile fluid, so normally no bacteria or fungi are present. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The growth of any microorganism, such as bacteria or fungi, from peritoneal fluid is abnormal and indicates peritonitis. Risks 
 
 There is a small risk of the needle puncturing the bowel, bladder, or a blood vessel in the abdomen. This may result in  bowel perforation , bleeding, and infection. Considerations 
 
 The diagnosis of peritonitis is based on more than just the peritoneal fluid culture (which may be negative even if you have peritonitis). Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - peritoneal fluid Images 
 
 
 Peritoneal culture 
 References 
 
 Garcia-Tsao G. Cirrhosis and its sequelae. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 156. Runyon BA . Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger & Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 91. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia