
 Perirenal abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Perirenal  abscess  is a pocket of pus around one or both kidneys. It is caused by an infection. Causes 
 
 Most perirenal abscesses are caused by  urinary tract infections  that start in the bladder. They then spread to the kidney, and to the area around the kidney. Surgery in the urinary tract or reproductive system and a bloodstream infection can also lead to a perirenal abscess. The biggest risk factor for perirenal abscess is  kidney stones , by blockage of urine flow. This provides a place for an infection to grow. Bacteria tend to stick to the stones and antibiotics cannnot kill the bacteria there. Stones are found in 20 to 60% of patients with perirenal abscess. Other risk factors for perirenal abscess include: Diabetes Having an abnormal urinary tract Trauma IV drug use Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of perirenal abscess include: Chills Fever Pain in the flank (side of the abdomen) or  abdomen , which may extend to the groin or down the leg Sweating Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. You may have tenderness in the back or abdomen. Tests include: Blood culture CT scan  of the abdomen Ultrasound of the abdomen Urinalysis Urine culture  Treatment 
 
 To treat perirenal abscess, the pus can be drained through a catheter that is placed through the skin or with surgery. Antibiotics should also be given, at first through a vein (IV). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In general, quick diagnosis and treatment of perirenal abscess should lead to a good outcome. Kidney stones must be treated to avoid further infections. In rare cases, the infection can spread beyond the kidney area and into the bloodstream. This can be deadly. Possible Complications 
 
 If you have kidney stones, the infection may not go away. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have a history of kidney stones and develop:  Abdominal pain Burning with urination Chills Fever Urinary tract infection Prevention 
 
 If you have kidney stones, ask your provider about the best way to treat them to avoid a perirenal abscess. If you undergo urologic surgery, keep the surgical area as clean as possible. Alternative Names 
 
 Perinephric abscess Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 Chambers HL. Staphylococcal infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 296. Schaeffer AJ, Schaeffer EM. Infections of the urinary tract. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Kidney stones 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia