
 Pericarditis - after heart attack 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pericarditis is inflammation and swelling of the covering of the heart (pericardium). It can occur in the days or weeks following a  heart attack . Causes 
 
 Two types of  pericarditis  can occur after a  heart attack . Early pericarditis:  This form most occurs within 1 to 3 days after a heart attack. Inflammation and swelling develop as the body tries to clean up the diseased heart tissue. Late pericarditis:  This is also called Dressler syndrome. It is also called post-cardiac injury syndrome or postcardiotomy pericarditis). It most often develops several weeks or months after a heart attack, heart surgery, or other trauma to the heart. It can also happen a week after a heart injury. Dressler syndrome is thought to occur when the immune system attacks healthy heart tissue by mistake. Things that put you at higher risk of pericarditis include: A previous heart attack Open heart surgery Chest trauma A heart attack that has affected the thickness of your heart muscle Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Anxiety Chest pain  from the swollen pericardium rubbing on the heart. The pain may be sharp, tight or crushing and may move to the neck, shoulder, or abdomen. The pain may also be worse when you breathe and go away when you lean forward, stand, or sit up. Trouble breathing Dry  cough Fast heart rate  (tachycardia) Fatigue Fever  (common with the second type of pericarditis) Malaise  (general ill feeling) Splinting of ribs (bending over or holding the chest) with deep breathing Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will listen to your heart and lungs with a stethoscope. There may be a rubbing sound (called a pericardial friction rub, not to be confused with a heart murmur).  Heart sounds  in general may be weak or sound far away. A buildup of fluid in the covering of the heart or space around the lungs (pericardial effusion) is not common after a heart attack. But, it often does occur in some people with Dressler syndrome. Tests may include: Cardiac injury markers (CK-MB and  troponin  may help tell  pericarditis  from a heart attack) Chest CT scan Chest MRI Chest x-ray Complete blood count ECG  (electrocardiogram) Echocardiogram ESR  (sedimentation rate) or  C-reactive protein  (measures of inflammation) Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to make the heart work better and reduce pain and other symptoms. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or aspirin may be used to treat inflammation of the pericardium. A drug called colchicine is often used with these medicines. Steroids are commonly used for Dressler syndrome. They are not often used for early pericarditis unless the condition does not respond to other treatment. In some cases, excess fluid surrounding the heart (pericardial effusion) may need to be removed. This is done with a procedure called  pericardiocentesis . If complications develop, part of the pericardium may need to be removed with surgery (pericardiectomy). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The condition may come back, even in people who get treatment. Untreated pericarditis can be life threatening in some cases. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications of pericarditis are: Cardiac tamponade Congestive heart failure Constrictive pericarditis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop symptoms of pericarditis after a heart attack You have been diagnosed with pericarditis and symptoms continue or come back despite treatment Alternative Names 
 
 Dressler syndrome; Post-MI pericarditis; Post-cardiac injury syndrome; Postcardiotomy pericarditis Images 
 
 
 Acute MI 
 Pericardium 
 Post-MI pericarditis 
 Pericardium 
 References 
 
 Imazio M, Brucato A, Forno D, et al. Efficacy and safety of colchicine for pericarditis prevention. Systematic review and meta-analysis.  Heart . 2012;98(14):1078-1082. PMID: 22442198  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22442198 . LeWinter MM, Hopkins WE. Pericardial diseases. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 71. Little WC, Oh JK. Pericardial diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 77. Read More 
 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Heart attack 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Immune response 
 Open heart surgery 
 Pulmonary edema 
 
 Review Date 8/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Attack 
 Pericardial Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia