
 Peritonitis - secondary 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The peritoneum is the thin tissue that lines the inner wall of the abdomen and covers most of the abdominal organs. Peritonitis is present when this tissue becomes inflamed or infected. Secondary peritonitis is when another condition is the cause. Causes 
 
 Secondary peritonitis has several major causes. Bacteria may enter the peritoneum through a hole (perforation) in an of the organ digestive tract. The hole may be caused by a ruptured appendix, stomach ulcer, or perforated colon. It may also come from an injury, such as a gunshot or knife wound. Bile  or chemicals released by the pancreas may leak into the abdominal cavity. This may be caused by  sudden swelling and inflammation of the pancreas . Tubes or catheters placed into the abdomen may cause this problem. These include catheters for peritoneal dialysis, feeding tubes, and others. An infection of the bloodstream (sepsis) may lead to an infection in the abdomen also. This is a severe illness. This tissue may become infected when there is no clear cause. Necrotizing enterocolitis  occurs when the lining of the intestinal wall dies. This problem nearly always develops in an infant who is ill or born early. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Swollen abdomen  when your belly area is bigger than usual Abdominal pain Decreased appetite Fever Low urine output Nausea Thirst Vomiting Note: There may be signs of  shock . Exams and Tests 
 
 During a physical exam, the health care provider may notice abnormal  vital signs  with fever,  rapid heart rate  and breathing, and low blood pressure. Tests may include: Blood culture Blood chemistry, including pancreatic enzymes Complete blood count Liver and kidney function tests X-rays or CT scan Peritoneal fluid culture Urinalysis  Treatment 
 
 Often, surgery is needed to remove or treat sources of infection. These may be an infected bowel, an inflamed appendix, or an  abscess . General treatment includes: Antibiotics Fluids through a vein (IV) Pain medicines Tube through the nose into the stomach or intestine (nasogastric or NG tube)  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome can range from complete recovery to overwhelming infection and death. Factors that determine the outcome include: How long the symptoms were present before treatment began The person's general health  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Abscess Gangrene (dead) bowel Intraperitoneal  adhesions  (a potential cause of future bowel blockage) Septic shock When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of  peritonitis . This is a serious condition. It needs emergency treatment in most cases. Alternative Names 
 
 Secondary peritonitis Images 
 
 
 Peritoneal sample 
 References 
 
 Turnage RH, Badgwell B. Abdominal wall, umbilicus, peritoneum, mesenteries, omentum, and retroperitoneum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 45. Wyers SG, Matthews JB. Surgical peritonitis and other diseases of the peritoneum, mesentery, omentum, and diaphragm. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Adhesion 
 Bile 
 Biliary system 
 Necrotizing enterocolitis 
 Septic shock 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Dialysis 
 Kidney Failure 
 Liver Diseases 
 Peritoneal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia