
 Personality disorders 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Personality disorders are a group of mental conditions in which a person has a long-term pattern of behaviors, emotions, and thoughts that is very different from his or her culture's expectations. These behaviors interfere with the person's ability to function in relationships, work, or other settings. Causes 
 
 Causes of personality disorders are unknown. Genetic and environmental factors are thought to play a role. Mental health professionals categorize these disorders into the following types: Antisocial personality disorder Avoidant personality disorder Borderline personality disorder Dependent personality disorder Histrionic personality disorder Narcissistic personality disorder Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder Paranoid personality disorder Schizoid personality disorder Schizotypal personality disorder Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary widely depending on the type of personality disorder. In general, personality disorders involve feelings, thoughts, and behaviors that don't adapt to a wide range of settings. These patterns usually begin in the teens and may lead to problems in social and work situations. The severity of these conditions ranges from mild to severe. Exams and Tests 
 
 Personality disorders are diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. Treatment 
 
 At first, people with these disorders usually don't seek treatment on their own. This is because they feel the disorder is part of themselves. They tend to seek help once their behavior has caused severe problems in their relationships or work. They may also seek help when they are struggling with another mental health problem, such as a mood or substance use disorder. Although personality disorders take time to treat, certain forms of talk therapy are helpful. In some cases, medicines are a useful addition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook varies. Some personality disorders improve greatly during middle age without any treatment. Others only improve slowly even with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Problems with relationships Problems with school or work Other mental health disorders  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider or mental health professional if you or someone you know has symptoms of a personality disorder. References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Personality disorders.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013:645-685. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Hopwood CJ. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder 
 Schizoid personality disorder 
 
 Review Date 7/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia