
 PET scan for breast cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A breast positron emission tomography  (PET) scan  is an imaging test that uses a radioactive substance (called a tracer) to look for breast cancer. This tracer can help identify areas of cancer that an MRI or CT scan may miss. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A PET scan requires a small amount of radioactive material (tracer). This tracer is given through a vein (IV), usually on the inside of your elbow. It travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. The tracer helps the radiologist see certain areas or diseases more clearly. You will need to wait nearby as your body absorbs the tracer. This usually takes about 1 hour. Then, you will lie on a narrow table, which slides into a large tunnel-shaped scanner. The PET scanner detects signals from the tracer. A computer changes the results into 3D pictures. The images are displayed on a monitor for your doctor to read. You must lie still during test. Too much movement can blur images and cause errors. The test takes about 90 minutes. Most PET scans are now performed along with a CT scan. This combination scan is called a PET/CT. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat anything for 4 to 6 hours before the scan. You will be able to drink water. Tell your health care provider if: You are afraid of close spaces (have claustrophobia). You may be given a medicine to help you feel sleepy and less anxious. You are pregnant or think you might be pregnant. You are breastfeeding. You have any allergies to injected dye (contrast). You take insulin for diabetes. You will need special preparation. Always tell your provider about the medicines you're taking, including those bought without a prescription. Sometimes, medicines can interfere with the test results. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a sharp sting when the needle containing the tracer is placed into your vein. A PET scan causes no pain. The table may be hard or cold, but you can request a blanket or pillow. An intercom in the room allows you to speak to someone at any time. There is no recovery time, unless you were given a medicine to relax. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A PET scan is most often used when other tests, such as MRI scan or CT scan, DO NOT provide enough information. A breast PET scan is used only after a woman has been diagnosed with breast cancer. It is done to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes, liver, lung, or bones. If you have breast cancer, your doctor may order this scan: Soon after your diagnosis to see if the cancer has spread After treatment if there is concern that the cancer has come back During treatment to see if the cancer is responding to treatment A PET scan is not used to screen for, or diagnose, breast cancer. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means there are no areas outside the breast in which the radiotracer has abnormally collected. This result most likely means the breast cancer has not spread to other parts of the body. Very small areas of breast cancer may not show up on a PET scan. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may mean that the breast cancer has spread. Blood sugar or insulin level may affect the test results in people with diabetes. Risks 
 
 The amount of radiation used in a PET scan is low. It is about the same amount of radiation as in most CT scans. Also, the radiation does not last for very long in your body. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should let their doctor know before having this test. Infants and babies developing in the womb are more sensitive to the effects of radiation because their organs are still growing. It is possible, although very unlikely, to have an allergic reaction to the radioactive substance. Some people have pain, redness, or swelling at the injection site. Alternative Names 
 
 Breast positron emission tomography; PET - breast; PET - tumor imaging - breast References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Positron emission tomography (PET) - diagnostic. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:892-894. National Cancer Institute. PDQ: breast cancer treatment - health professional version. Cancer.gov Web site. Updated August 11, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/breast/healthprofessional . Accessed October 12, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: breast cancer. Version 2.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/breast.pdf . Accessed October 12, 2016. Tabouret-Viaud C, Botsikas D, Delattre BM, et al. PET/MR in breast cancer.  Semin Nucl Med . 2015;45(4):304-321. PMID: 26050658  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26050658 . 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Cancer 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Browse the Encyclopedia