
 Peutz-Jeghers syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a disorder in which growths called polyps form in the intestines. It is passed down through families (inherited). A person with PJS has a high risk of developing certain cancers. Causes 
 
 It is unknown how many people are affected by PJS. However, the National Institutes of Health estimates that it affects about 1 in 25,000 to 300,000 births. There are 2 types of PJS: Familial PJS may be due to a mutation in a gene called  STK11 . The genetic defect can be inherited through families as an  autosomal dominant  trait. That means if 1 of your parents has this type of PJS, you have a 50% chance of inheriting the gene and having the disease. Sporadic PJS is not passed down through families and appears unrelated to an  STK11  gene mutation.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of PJS are: Brownish or bluish-gray spots on the lips, gums, inner lining of the mouth, and skin Clubbed fingers or toes Cramping pain in the belly area Dark freckles on and around the lips of a newborn Blood in the stool  that can be seen with the naked eye (sometimes) Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 The polyps develop mainly in the small intestine, but also in the large intestine (colon). An exam of the colon called a colonoscopy will show colon polyps. The small intestine is evaluated in 2 ways. One is a barium x-ray (small bowel series). The other is a capsule endoscopy, in which a small camera is swallowed and then takes many pictures as it travels through the small intestine. Additional exams may show: 
 Part of the intestine folded in on itself ( intussusception ) Benign (noncancerous) tumors in the ear Laboratory tests may include: Complete blood count -- may reveal  anemia Genetic testing Stool guaiac , to look for blood in stool Total iron-binding capacity  (TIBC) -- may be linked with iron-deficiency anemia Treatment 
 
 Surgery may be needed to remove polyps that cause long-term problems. Iron supplements help counteract blood loss. People with this condition should be monitored by a health care provider and checked regularly for cancerous polyp changes. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 There may be a high risk for these polyps becoming cancerous. Some studies link PJS with cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, lung, breast, uterus, and ovaries. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Intussusception Polyps that lead to cancer Ovarian cysts A type of ovarian tumors called sex cord tumors When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you or your baby has symptoms of this condition. Severe abdominal pain may be a sign of an emergency condition such as intussusception. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended if you are planning to have children and have a family history of this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 PJS Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Donoghue LJ. Tumors of the digestive tract. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 345. McGarrity TJ, Amos CI, Frazier ML, Wei C. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.  GeneReviews . Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2013:7.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1266/  Accessed October 27, 2015. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Ovarian cysts 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cancer 
 Colonic Polyps 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia