
 Pharyngitis - sore throat 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pharyngitis, or sore throat, is discomfort, pain, or scratchiness in the throat. It often makes it painful to swallow.  Causes 
 
 Pharyngitis is caused by swelling in the back of the throat (pharynx) between the tonsils and the voice box (larynx). Most sore throats are caused by colds, the flu, coxsackie virus or mono (mononucleosis). Bacteria that can cause pharyngitis in some cases: Strep throat  is caused by group A streptococcus. Less commonly, bacterial diseases such as gonorrhea and chlamydia can cause sore throat.  Most cases of pharyngitis occur during the colder months. The illness often spreads among family members and close contacts. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a sore throat. Other symptoms may include: Fever 
  Headache
   
  Joint pain and muscle aches
   
  Skin rashes
   Swollen lymph nodes  (glands) in the neck
   Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and look at your throat. A rapid test or throat culture to test for strep throat may be done. Other laboratory tests may be done, depending on the suspected cause. Treatment 
 
 Most sore throats are caused by viruses. Antibiotics do not help viral sore throats. Using these medicines when they are not needed leads to antibiotics not working as well when they are needed. Sore throat is treated with antibiotics if:  A strep test or culture is positive. Your provider cannot diagnose strep throat by symptoms or a physical exam alone. A culture for chlamydia or gonorrhea is positive. Sore throat caused by the flu (influenza) may be helped by antiviral medicines. The following tips may help your sore throat feel better: Drink soothing liquids. You can either drink warm liquids, such as lemon tea with honey, or cold liquids, such as ice water. You could also suck on a fruit-flavored ice pop. Gargle several times a day with warm salt water (1/2 tsp or 3 grams of salt in 1 cup or 240 milliliters of water). Suck on hard candies or throat lozenges. Young children should not be given these products because they can choke on them. Use of a cool-mist vaporizer or humidifier can moisten the air and soothe a dry and painful throat. Try over-the-counter pain medicines, such as acetaminophen.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Ear infection Sinusitis Abscess near the tonsils When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You develop a sore throat that does not go away after several days You have a high fever, swollen lymph nodes in your neck, or a rash Seek medical care right away if you have a sore throat and trouble breathing. Alternative Names 
 
 Pharyngitis - bacterial; Sore throat Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 References 
 
 Flores AR, Caserta MT. Pharyngitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 59. Frye R, Bailey J, Blevins AE. Clinical inquiries. Which treatments provide the most relief for pharyngitis pain?  J Fam Pract.  2011;60(5):293-294. PMID: 21544279  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21544279 .
 Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis.  2012;55(10):e86-e102. PMID: 22965026  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22965026 . Tanz RR. Acute pharyngitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 381. van Driel ML, De Sutter AIM, Keber N, Habraken H, Christiaens T. Different antibiotic treatments for group A streptococcal pharyngitis.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2013;4:CD004406. PMID: 23633318  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23633318 . Read More 
 
 Rheumatic fever 
 Strep throat 
 
 Review Date 11/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sore Throat 
 Browse the Encyclopedia