
 Pheniramine overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pheniramine is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It helps relieve allergy symptoms. Pheniramine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Pheniramine Where Found 
 
 Pheniramine can be found in these medicines: Citra Forte Dehistine D Liqui-Histine Poly-D Poly-Histine Ru-Tuss with hydrocodone Other products may also contain pheniramine. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of an overdose of pheniramine in different parts of the body. BLADDER AND KIDNEYS Inability to urinate Difficulty urinating  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Dilated (enlarged) pupils Dry mouth Ringing in the ears  HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS Rapid heartbeat Increased blood pressure  NERVOUS SYSTEM  Agitation Coma Convulsions (seizures) Delirium Disorientation Drowsiness Fever Hallucinations Nervousness Tremor Unsteadiness Weakness  SKIN Flushed skin Warm skin  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Nausea and vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Catheter (thin, flexible tube) into the bladder if person cannot urinate on their own  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the person survives the first 24 hours, chances of recovery are good. Few people die from an antihistamine overdose. With extremely high doses of antihistamines, serious heart rhythm disturbances may occur, which may result in death. Alternative Names 
 
 Dehistine D overdose; Liqui-Histine overdose; Poly-D overdose; Poly-Histine overdose; Liqui-minic infant overdose; Triactin overdose; Triaminic infant overdose References 
 
 Gussow L, Carson A. Sedative hypnotics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 165. Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 45. Thomas SHL. Antihistamine poisoning.  Medicine . 2012;40(3):109-110.  Velez LI, Feng S-Y. Anticholinergics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 150. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cold and Cough Medicines 
 Browse the Encyclopedia