
 Pheochromocytoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pheochromocytoma is a rare  tumor  of adrenal gland tissue. It results in the release of too much epinephrine and norepinephrine, hormones that control  heart rate , metabolism, and blood pressure. Causes 
 
 Pheochromocytoma may occur as a single tumor or as more than one growth. It usually develops in the center (medulla) of one or both  adrenal glands . In rare cases, this kind of tumor occurs outside the adrenal gland. When it does, it is usually somewhere else in the abdomen. Very few pheochromocytomas are cancerous. The tumors may occur at any age, but they are most common from early to mid-adulthood. In few instances, the condition may also be seen among family members (hereditary). Symptoms 
 
 Most people with this disorder have attacks of a set of symptoms, which happen when the tumor releases hormones. The attacks usually last from a few minutes to hours. The set of symptoms include: Headaches Heart palpitations Sweating High blood pressure As the tumor grows, the attacks often increase in frequency, length, and severity. Other symptoms that may occur include: Abdominal  or chest pain Irritability, nervousness Pallor Weight loss Nausea and vomiting Shortness of breath Seizures Problems sleeping Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. You'll be asked about your medical history and symptoms. Tests done may include: Abdominal CT  scan Adrenal  biopsy Catecholamines blood test  (serum catecholamines) Glucose test Metanephrine blood test (serum metanephrine) MIBG scintiscan MRI of abdomen Urine catecholamines Urine metanephrines PET scan of abdomen Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves removing the tumor with surgery. It is important to stabilize your blood pressure and pulse with certain medicines before surgery. You may need to stay in the hospital and have your vital signs closely monitored around the time of surgery. After surgery, your vital signs will be continuously monitored in an intensive care unit. When the tumor cannot be surgically removed, you will need to take medicine to manage it. A combination of medicines is usually needed to control the effects of the too much hormones. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy have not been effective in curing this kind of tumor. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people who have noncancerous tumors that are removed with surgery are still alive after 5 years. The tumors come back in some people. Levels of the hormones norepinephrine and epinephrine return to normal after surgery. Continued high blood pressure after surgery. Standard treatments can usually control the high blood pressure.  People who have been successfully treated for pheochromocytoma should have testing from time to time to make sure the tumor has not returned. Close family members may also benefit from testing, because some cases are inherited. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you: Have symptoms of pheochromocytoma, such as headache, sweating, and palpitations Had a pheochromocytoma in the past and your symptoms return Alternative Names 
 
 Chromaffin tumors; Paraganglionoma Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Adrenal metastases, CT scan 
 Adrenal Tumor - CT 
 Adrenal gland hormone secretion 
 References 
 
 Cusack JC, Phitayakorn R. The management of pheochromocytoma. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:636-642. National Cancer Institute. Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. Updated July 10, 2015. Cancer.gov.  www.cancer.gov/types/pheochromocytoma/hp/pheochromocytoma-treatment-pdq#link/_38_toc . Accessed October 22, 2016. Pacak K, Timmers HJLM, Eisenhofer G. Pheochromocytoma. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Read More 
 
 Adrenal glands 
 Pulse 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 8/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia