
 Phosphorus in diet 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Phosphorus is a mineral that makes up 1% of a person's total body weight. It is the second most abundant mineral in the body. It is present in every cell of the body. Most of the phosphorus in the body is found in the bones and teeth. Function 
 
 The main function of phosphorus is in the formation of bones and teeth.  It plays an important role in how the body uses  carbohydrates  and fats. It is also needed for the body to make  protein  for the growth, maintenance, and repair of cells and tissues. Phosphorus also helps the body make ATP, a molecule the body uses to store energy. Phosphorus works with the B vitamins. It also helps with the following:  Kidney function Muscle contractions Normal heartbeat Nerve signaling  Food Sources 
 
 The main food sources are the protein food groups of meat and milk. A diet that includes the right amounts of meal plan calcium and protein will also provide enough phosphorus. Whole-grain breads and cereals contain more phosphorus than cereals and breads made from refined flour. However, the phosphorus is stored in a form that is not absorbed by humans. Fruits and vegetables contain only small amounts of phosphorus. Side Effects 
 
 Phosphorus is so readily available in the food supply so deficiency is rare. Excessively high levels of phosphorus in the blood, although rare, can combine with calcium to form deposits in soft tissues such as muscle. High levels of phosphorus in blood only occur in people with severe kidney disease or severe dysfunction of their calcium regulation. Recommendations 
 
 According to Institute of Medicine recommendations, the recommended dietary intakes of phosphorus are as follows: 0 to 6 months: 100 milligrams per day (mg/day)* 7 to 12 months: 275 mg/day* 1 to 3 years: 460 mg/day 4 to 8 years: 500 mg/day 9 to 18 years: 1,250 mg Adults: 700 mg/day  Pregnant or lactating women:  Younger than 18: 1,250 mg/day Older than 18: 700 mg/day  *AI or Adequate Intake Alternative Names 
 
 Diet - phosphorus References 
 
 Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine.  DRI Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride . Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1997. PMID: 23115811  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23115811 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Read More 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Minerals 
 Browse the Encyclopedia