
 Pierre Robin sequence 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pierre Robin sequence (or syndrome) is a condition in which an infant has a smaller than normal lower jaw, a tongue that falls back in the throat, and difficulty breathing. It is present at birth. Causes 
 
 The exact causes of Pierre Robin sequence are unknown. It may be part of many genetic syndromes. The lower jaw develops slowly before birth, but may grow faster during the first few years of life. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of this condition include: Cleft soft palate High-arched palate Jaw that is very small with a small chin Jaw that is far back in the throat Repeated ear infections Small opening in the roof of the mouth, which may cause choking or liquids coming back out through the nose Teeth that appear when the baby is born Tongue that is large compared to the jaw  Exams and Tests 
 
 A health care provider can often diagnose this condition during a physical exam. Consulting with a genetic specialist can rule out other problems linked to this syndrome. Treatment 
 
 Do NOT put infants with this condition on their back. This is to prevent their tongue from falling back into their airway. In moderate cases, the child will need to have a tube placed through their nose and into their airways to avoid airway blockage. In severe cases, surgery is needed to prevent a blockage in the upper airway. Some children need surgery to make a hole in their airway or to move their jaw forward. Feeding must be done very carefully to avoid choking and breathing liquids into the airways. The child may need to be fed through a tube to prevent choking. Support Groups 
 
 For support and information, the following organizations may be helpful: The Pierre Robin Network  The Cleft Palate Foundation --  www.cleftline.org . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Choking and feeding problems may go away on their own over the first few years as the lower jaw grows to a more normal size. There is a high risk for problems if the child's airways are not kept from getting blocked. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Breathing difficulties, especially when the child sleeps Choking episodes Congestive heart failure Death Feeding difficulties Low blood oxygen and brain damage (due to difficulty breathing) Type of high blood pressure called pulmonary hypertension When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Babies born with this condition are often diagnosed at birth. Call your provider if your child has choking episodes or breathing problems. A blockage of the airways may cause a high-pitched noise when the child breathes in. It can also lead to blueness of the skin (cyanosis). Also call if your child has other breathing problems. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Treatment may reduce breathing problems and choking. Alternative Names 
 
 Pierre Robin syndrome; Pierre Robin complex; Pierre Robin anomaly Images 
 
 
 Infant hard and soft palates 
 References 
 
 Tinanoff N. Syndromes with oral manifestations. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 311. Read More 
 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia