
 Pinguecula 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pingueculum is a common, non-cancerous growth of the conjunctiva. This is the clear, thin tissue that covers the white part of the eye (sclera). The growth occurs in the part of the conjunctiva that is exposed when the eye is open. Causes 
 
 The exact cause is unknown. Long-term sunlight exposure and  eye irritation  may be factors. Welding is a major job-related risk. Symptoms 
 
 A pingueculum looks like a small, yellowish bump on the conjunctiva near the cornea. It can appear on either side of the cornea. However, it more often occurs on the nose (nasal) side. The growth may increase in size over many years. Exams and Tests 
 
 An eye exam is often enough to diagnose this disorder. Treatment 
 
 No treatment is needed in most cases. Keeping the eye moist with artificial tears may help prevent the area from becoming inflamed. Temporary use of mild steroid eye drops can also be helpful. Rarely, the growth may need to be removed for comfort or for cosmetic reasons. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition is non-cancerous ( benign ) and the outlook is good. Possible Complications 
 
 The pingueculum may grow over the cornea and block vision. When this happens, the growth is called a  pterygium . These two conditions occur under similar conditions. However, they are thought to be separate diseases. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if the pingueculum changes in size, shape, or color, or if you would like to have it removed. Prevention 
 
 Things you can do that may help prevent a pingueculum or keep the problem from getting worse include: Keeping the eye well lubricated Wearing good quality sunglasses Avoiding eye irritants  Images 
 
 
 Eye anatomy 
 References 
 
 Sugar A, Shtein RM. Pterygium and conjunctival degenerations In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 4.9.  Zloty P, Belin MW. Pterygium. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2032:vol 6; chap 35.  Read More 
 
 Conjunctiva 
 Eye burning - itching and discharge 
 Mucosa 
 
 Review Date 11/5/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia