
 Pityriasis rosea 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pityriasis rosea is a common type of skin rash seen in young adults. Causes 
 
 Pityriasis rosea is believed to be caused by a virus. It occurs most often in the fall and spring. Although pityriasis rosea may occur in more than one person in a household at a time, it is not thought to spread from one person to another. Symptoms 
 
 Attacks most often last 4 to 8 weeks. Symptoms may disappear by 3 weeks or last as long as 12 weeks. The rash starts with a single large  patch  called a herald patch. After several days, more skin rashes will appear on the chest, back, arms, and legs. The skin rashes: Are often pink or pale red Are oval in shape May be scaly May follow lines in the skin or appear in a "Christmas tree" pattern May itch  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can usually diagnose pityriasis rosea by the way the rash looks. Rarely, the following tests are needed: A blood test to be sure it is not a form of syphilis, which can cause a similar rash A  skin biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis Treatment 
 
 If symptoms are mild, you may not need treatment. Gentle bathing, mild lubricants or creams, or mild hydrocortisone creams may be used to soothe irritation. Antihistamines taken by mouth may be used to reduce itching. You can buy antihistamines at the store without a prescription. Moderate sun exposure or ultraviolet (UV) light treatment may help make the rash go away more quickly. However, you must be careful to avoid sunburn. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pityriasis rosea usually goes away within 6 to 12 weeks. It doesn't usually come back. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms of pityriasis rosea. Images 
 
 
 Pityriasis rosea on the chest 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Psoriasis and other papulosquamous diseases. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby;2009:chap 8. Pityriasis rosea. Alvero R, Ferri FF, Fort GG, et al, eds. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2015.  1st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:section I. Read More 
 
 Patches 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Rashes 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia