
 Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumocystis jiroveci  pneumonia is a fungal infection of the lungs. The disease used to be called  Pneumocystis carini  or PCP pneumonia. Causes 
 
 This type of pneumonia is caused by the fungus  Pneumocystis jiroveci . This fungus is common in the environment and rarely causes illness in healthy people. However, it can cause a lung infection in people with a weakened immune system due to: Cancer Long-term use of corticosteroids or other medicines that weaken the immune system  HIV/AIDS Organ or bone marrow transplant Pneumocystis jiroveci  was a rare infection before the AIDS epidemic. Before the use of preventive antibiotics for the condition, most people in the United States with advanced AIDS often developed this infection. Symptoms 
 
 Pneumocystis pneumonia in people with AIDS usually develops slowly over days to weeks or even months, and is less severe. People with pneumocystis pneumonia who do not have AIDS usually get sick faster and are more severely ill. Symptoms include: Cough, often mild and dry Fever Rapid breathing Shortness of breath, especially with activity (exertion) Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood gases Bronchoscopy  (with lavage) Lung biopsy X-ray of the chest Sputum exam to check for fungus that causes the infection CBC ß-1,3 glucan level in the blood  Treatment 
 
  Anti-infection medicines can be given by mouth (orally) or through a vein ( intravenously ), depending on how severe the illness is. People with low oxygen levels and moderate to severe disease are often prescribed corticosteroids as well. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pneumocystis pneumonia can be life threatening, causing respiratory failure that can lead to death. People with this condition need early and effective treatment. For moderate to severe pneumocystis pneumonia in people with HIV/AIDS, the short term use of corticosteroids has decreased the incidence of death. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Pleural effusion  (extremely rare) Pneumothorax  (collapsed lung) Respiratory  failure (may require breathing support) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have a weakened immune system due to AIDS, cancer, transplantation, or corticosteroid use, call your provider if you develop a cough, fever, or shortness of breath. Prevention 
 
 Preventive therapy is recommended for: People with HIV/AIDS who have CD4 counts below 200 cells/microliter Bone marrow transplant recipients Organ transplant recipients People who take long-term, high-dose corticosteroids People who have had previous episodes of this infection People who take long-term immunomodulatory drugs Alternative Names 
 
 Pneumocystosis; PCP; Pneumocystis carinii 
  Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 AIDS 
 Pneumocystosis 
 References 
 
 Kovacs JA. Pneumocystis pneumonia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 341. Walzer PD, Smulian AG, Miller RF.  Pneumocystis species . In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 271. Read More 
 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Respiratory 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 HIV/AIDS and Infections 
 Pneumocystis Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia