
 Poinsettia plant exposure 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Poinsettia plants, commonly used during the holidays, are not poisonous. Eating this plant does not result in a trip to the hospital in most cases. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Diterpene esters Where Found 
 
 Leaves, stem, sap of the poinsettia plant Symptoms 
 
 Poinsettia plant exposure can affect many parts of the body. EYES (IF DIRECT CONTACT OCCURS)  Burning Redness  STOMACH AND INTESTINES (SYMPTOMS ARE MILD)  Nausea and vomiting Stomach ache  SKIN Skin rash and itching  Home Care 
 
 Take the following steps if a person is exposed to the plant. Rinse the mouth out with water if leaves or stems were eaten.  Rinse eyes with water, if needed. Wash the skin of any area that appears irritated with soap and water. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Seek medical help if the person has a severe reaction. Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Symptoms will be treated as needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. This plant is not considered toxic. People most often make a full recovery. DO NOT touch or eat any unfamiliar plant. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 Christmas flower poisoning; Lobster plant poisoning; Painted leaf poisoning References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia