
 Pokeweed poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pokeweed is a flowering plant. Pokeweed poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of this plant. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: Phytolaccatoxin Phytolaccigenin  Where Found 
 
 The highest amounts of poison are found in the roots, leaves, and stems. Small amounts are in the fruit. Cooked berries and leaves (cooked twice in separate water) can technically be eaten. However, this is not recommended because there is no guarantee that they are safe. The roots should never be eaten. Symptoms most often appear within 6 hours of ingestion. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Diarrhea, sometimes hemorrhagic (bloody) diarrhea Stomach pain Nausea and vomiting Weakness Muscle spasms Convulsions Seizures Headache Heart block Rapid pulse Low blood pressure Slow or difficult breathing Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Name and part of the plant that was eaten, if known Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids by IV (through the vein) Medicines to treat symptoms Laxatives Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Deaths have been reported. Improper cooking of leaves or eating some of the roots with the leaves can cause serious poisoning. Eating more than 10 uncooked berries can cause serious problems in children. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 American nightshade poisoning; Inkberry poisoning; Pigeon Berry poisoning; Pokeberry poisoning; Scoke poisoning; Virginia poke poisoning; Poke salad poisoning References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia