
 Polyarteritis nodosa 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Polyarteritis nodosa is a serious blood vessel disease. The small and medium-sized arteries become swollen and damaged. Causes 
 
 Arteries are the blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood to organs and tissues. The cause of polyarteritis nodosa is unknown. The condition occurs when certain immune cells attack the affected arteries. The tissues that are fed by the affected arteries DO NOT get the oxygen and nourishment they need. Damage occurs as a result. More adults than children get this disease.  People with active hepatitis B or hepatitis C may develop this disease. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are caused by damage to affected organs. The skin, joints, muscle, gastrointestinal tract, heart, kidneys, and nervous system are often affected. Symptoms include: Abdominal pain Decreased appetite Fatigue Fever Joint aches Muscle aches Unintentional weight loss Weakness If nerves are affected, you may have numbness, pain, burning, and weakness. Damage to the nervous system may cause strokes or seizures.  Exams and Tests 
 
 No specific lab tests are available to diagnose polyarteritis nodosa. You will have a physical exam.  Lab tests that can help make the diagnosis include: Complete blood count  (CBC), creatinine, tests for hepatitis B and C, and urinalysis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate  (ESR) or  C-reactive protein  (CRP). Serum protein electrophoresis, cryoglobulins. Serum complement levels. Arteriogram  tissue  biopsy . Other blood tests may be done to rule out similar conditions, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (ANA) or granulomatosis with polyangiitis (ANCA). Test for HIV.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves medicines to suppress inflammation and the immune system. These may include steroids, such as prednisone. Similar medicines, such as azathioprine, methotrexate or mycophenolate that allow for reducing the dose of steroids are often used as well. Cyclophosphamide is used in severe cases. For polyarteritis nodosa related to hepatitis, treatment may involve plasmapheresis and antiviral medicines. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Current treatments with steroids and other drugs that suppress the immune system (such as azathioprine or cyclophosphamide) can improve symptoms and the chance of long-term survival.  The most serious complications most often involve the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract.  Without treatment, the outlook is poor. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Heart attack Intestinal necrosis  and perforation Kidney failure Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder. Early diagnosis and treatment may improve the chance of a good outcome. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. However, early treatment can prevent some damage and symptoms. Alternative Names 
 
 Periarteritis nodosa; PAN; Systemic necrotizing vasculitis Images 
 
 
 Polyarteritis, microscopic on the shin 
 Microscopic polyarteritis 2 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Luqmani R. Polyarteritis nodosa and related disorders. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 90. Pagnoux C, Seror R, Henegar C, et al. Clinical features and outcomes in 348 patients with polyarteritis nodosa: a systematic retrospective study of patients diagnosed between 1963 and 2005 and entered into the French Vasculitis Study Group Database.  Arthritis Rheum . 2010;62(2):616-626. PMID: 20112401  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20112401 . Ribi C, Cohen P, Pagnoux C, et al. Treatment of polyarteritis nodosa and microscopic polyangiitis without poor-prognosis factors: A prospective randomized study of one hundred twenty-four patients.  Arthritis Rheum . 2010;62(4):1186-1197. PMID: 20131268  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20131268 . Stone JH. The systemic vasculitides. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 270. Warrington KJ, Cooper LT. Vasculitis and other uncommon arteriopathies. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 78. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Heart attack 
 Small intestinal ischemia and infarction 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 5/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia