
 Porphyria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Porphyrias are a group of rare inherited disorders. An important part of  hemoglobin , called heme, is not made properly. Heme is also found in myoglobin, a protein found in certain muscles. Causes 
 
 Normally, the body makes heme in a multi-step process. Porphyrins are made during several steps of this process. People with porphyria are lacking certain  enzymes  needed for this process. This causes abnormal amounts of porphyrins or related chemicals to build up in the body. There are many different forms of porphyria. The most common type is porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT). Drugs, infection, alcohol, and hormones such as estrogen may trigger attacks of certain types of porphyria. Porphyria is inherited. This means the disorder is passed down through families. Symptoms 
 
 Porphyria causes three major symptoms: Abdominal pain or cramping (only in some forms of the disease) Sensitivity to light that can cause rashes, blistering, and scarring of the skin (photodermatitis) Problems with the nervous system and muscles (seizures, mental disturbances, nerve damage)  Attacks can occur suddenly. They often start with severe abdominal pain followed by vomiting and constipation. Being out in the sun can cause pain, sensations of heat, blistering, and skin redness and swelling. Blisters heal slowly, often with scarring or skin color changes. The scarring may be disfiguring. Urine may turn red or brown after an attack. Other symptoms include: Muscle pain Muscle weakness or paralysis Numbness or tingling Pain in the arms or legs Pain in the back Personality changes  Attacks can sometimes be life-threatening, producing: Low blood pressure Severe electrolyte imbalances Shock  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your doctor will perform a physical exam, which includes listening to your heart. You may have a fast heart rate (tachycardia). The doctor may find that your deep tendon reflexes (knee jerks or others) do not work properly. Blood and urine tests may reveal kidney problems or other problems. Special tests can measure porphyrins in the blood. Some of the other tests that may be done include: Blood gases Comprehensive metabolic panel Porphyrin levels and levels of other chemicals linked to this condition (often checked in the urine) Ultrasound of the abdomen Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 Some of the medicines used to treat a sudden (acute) attack of porphyria may include: Hematin given through a vein ( intravenously ) Pain medicine Propranolol to control the heartbeat Sedatives to help you feel calm and less anxious  Other treatments may include: Beta-carotene  supplements Chloroquine Fluids and glucose to boost  carbohydrate  levels, which helps limit the production of porphyrins Removal of blood (phlebotomy)  Depending on the type of porphyria you have, your doctor may tell you to: Avoid all alcohol Avoid drugs that may trigger an attack Avoid injuring the skin Avoid sunlight as much as possible and use sunscreen when outside Eat a high-carbohydrate diet  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Porphyria is a life-long disease with symptoms that come and go. Some forms of the disease cause more symptoms than others. Getting proper treatment and staying away from triggers can help lengthen the time between attacks. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Coma Gallstones Paralysis Respiratory failure (due to weakness of chest muscles) Scarring of the skin  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help as soon as you have signs of an acute attack. Talk to your doctor about your risk for this condition if you have a long history of undiagnosed abdominal pain, muscle and nerve problems, and sensitivity to sunlight.  Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may benefit people who want to have children and who have a family history of any type of porphyria. Alternative Names 
 
 Acute intermittent porphyria; Hereditary coproporphyria; Congenital erythropoietic porphyria; Erythropoietic protoporphyria Images 
 
 
 Porphyria cutanea tarda on the hands 
 References 
 
 Fuller SJ, Wiley JS. Heme biosynthesis and its disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 36. Hift RJ. The porphyrias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 210. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Acute 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 Gallstones 
 Hemoglobin 
 Muscle aches 
 Muscle function loss 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Photophobia  
 Rashes 
 Shock 
 Swelling 
 Vesicles 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Porphyria 
 Browse the Encyclopedia