
 Porphyrins - urine 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Porphyrins are natural chemicals in the body that help form many important substances in the body. One of these is hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen in the blood. Porphyrins can be measured in the urine or  blood . This article discusses the urine test. How the Test is Performed 
 
 After you provide a urine sample, it is tested in the lab. This is called a random urine sample. If needed, your health care provider may ask you to  collect your urine at home over 24 hours . This is called a 24-hour urine sample. Your provider will tell you how to do this. Follow instructions exactly so that the results are accurate. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your provider may tell you to temporarily stop taking medicines that may affect the test results. These may include: Antibiotics and anti-fungal drugs Anti-anxiety drugs Birth control pills Diabetes medicines Pain medicines Sleep medicines Do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your provider. How the Test will Feel 
 
 This test involves only normal urination and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor will order this test if you have signs of  porphyria  or other disorders that can cause abnormal urine porphyrins. Normal Results 
 
 Normal results vary. In general, for a 24-hour urine test, the range is about 50 to 300 mg. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Liver cancer Hepatitis Lead poisoning Porphyria (several types) Alternative Names 
 
 Urine uroporphyrin; Urine coproporphyrin Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Porphyrin urine test 
 References 
 
 Fuller SJ, Wiley JS. Heme biosynthesis and its disorders: porphyrias and sideroblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 36. McPherson R, Ben-Ezra J. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Delta-ALA urine test 
 Enzyme 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hepatitis 
 Lead poisoning 
 Liver cancer - hepatocellular carcinoma 
 PBG urine test 
 Porphyria 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Porphyria 
 Browse the Encyclopedia