
 Port-wine stain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A port-wine stain is a birthmark in which swollen blood vessels create a reddish-purplish discoloration of the skin. Causes 
 
 Port-wine stains occur in about 3 out of 1,000 people. In rare cases, port-wine stains are a sign of  Sturge-Weber syndrome  or  Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome . Symptoms 
 
 Early-stage port-wine stains are usually flat and pink. As the child gets older, the color may deepen to a dark red or purplish color. They occur most often on the face, but can appear anywhere on the body. Over time, the area can become thickened and take on a cobblestone-like appearance. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider can usually diagnose a port wine stain by looking at the skin. In a few cases, a skin biopsy is needed. Depending on the location of the birthmark and other symptoms, the provider may want to do an  intraocular pressure  test or  x-ray of the skull . An MRI or CT scan of the brain may also be done. Treatment 
 
 Many treatments have been tried for port-wine stains, including freezing, surgery, radiation, and tattooing. Laser therapy is most successful in eliminating port-wine stains. It is the only method that can destroy the tiny blood vessels in the skin without significantly damaging the skin. The exact type of laser used depends on the person's age and particular port-wine stain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Stains on the face respond better to laser therapy than those on the arms, legs, or middle of the body. Older stains may be more difficult to treat. Possible Complications 
 
 Some stains may occasionally cause deformity and increasing disfigurement. People with port-wine stains may have emotional and social problems related to their appearance. Port-wine stains that involve the upper and lower eyelids may be associated with the development of  glaucoma . Neurologic problems are present when port-wine stain is associated with a disorder such as Sturge-Weber syndrome. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 All birthmarks should be evaluated by the health care provider during a routine examination. Alternative Names 
 
 Nevus flammeus Images 
 
 
 Port wine stain on a child's face 
 Sturge-Weber syndrome - legs 
 References 
 
 Enjolras O. Vascular malformations. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 104. Krakowski AC, Eichenfield LF. Port wine stain ('nevus flammeus'). In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I.  Treatment of Skin Disease :  Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 193. Martin KL. Vascular disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 650. Read More 
 
 Glaucoma 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birthmarks 
 Browse the Encyclopedia