
 Post-traumatic stress disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a type of  anxiety disorder . It can occur after you have gone through an extreme emotional trauma that involved the threat of injury or death. Causes 
 
 Health care providers do not know why traumatic events cause PTSD in some people, but not in others. Your genes, emotions, and family setting may all play roles. Past emotional trauma may increase your risk of PTSD after a recent traumatic event. With PTSD, the body's response to a stressful event is changed. Normally, after the event, the body recovers. The stress hormones and chemicals the body releases due to the stress go back to normal levels. For some reason in a person with PTSD, the body keeps releasing the stress hormones and chemicals. PTSD can occur at any age. It can occur after events such as: Assault Car accidents Domestic abuse Natural disasters Prison stay Sexual assault Terrorism War  Symptoms 
 
 There are 4 types of PTSD symptoms: 1. Reliving the event, which disturbs day-to-day activity Flashback episodes in which the event seems to be happening again and again Repeated upsetting memories of the event Repeated nightmares of the event Strong, uncomfortable reactions to situations that remind you of the event  2. Avoidance Emotional numbing or feeling as though you do not care about anything Feeling detached Not able to remember important parts of the event Not interested in normal activities Showing less of your moods Avoiding places, people, or thoughts that remind you of the event Feeling like you have no future  3. Hyperarousal Always scanning your surroundings for signs of danger (hypervigilance) Not able to concentrate Startling easily Feeling irritable or having outbursts of anger Trouble falling or staying asleep  4. Negative thoughts and mood or feelings Constant guilt about the event, including survivor guilt Blaming others for the event Not being able to recall important parts of the event Loss of interest in activities or other people You may also have symptoms of  anxiety, stress, and tension : Agitation  or excitability Dizziness Fainting Feeling your heart beat in your chest Headache  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your provider may ask how long you have had symptoms. PTSD is diagnosed when you have had symptoms for at least 30 days. Your provider may also do a mental health exam, physical exam, and blood tests. These are done to look for other illnesses that are similar to PTSD. Treatment 
 
 Treatment for PTSD involves talk therapy (counseling), medicines, or both. TALK THERAPY During talk therapy, you talk with a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or therapist, in a calm and accepting setting. They can help you manage your PTSD symptoms. They will also guide you as you work through your feelings about the trauma. There are many types of talk therapy. One type that is often used for PTSD is called desensitization. During therapy, you are encouraged to remember the traumatic event and express your feelings about it. Over time, memories of the event become less frightening. During talk therapy, you may also learn ways to relax, especially when you start to have flashbacks. MEDICINES Your provider may suggest that you take medicines. They can help ease your depression or anxiety. They can also help you sleep better. Medicines need time to work. DO NOT stop taking them or change the amount (dosage) you take without talking to your provider. Ask your provider about possible side effects and what to do if you experience them. Support Groups 
 
 Support groups, whose members are people who have similar experiences with PTSD, can be helpful. Ask your provider about groups in your area. Support groups are usually not a good substitute for talk therapy or taking medicine, but can be a helpful addition. Resources for more information include: Anxiety and Depression Association of America:  www.adaa.org National Institute of Mental Health:  www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/post-traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd/index.shtml U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs:  www.ptsd.va.gov Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 PTSD can be treated. You can increase the chance of a good outcome: 
 See a provider right away if you think you have PTSD.
  
 Take an active part in your treatment and follow your provider's instructions.
  
 Accept support from others.
  
 Take care of your health. Exercise and eat healthy foods. 
  
 DO NOT drink alcohol or use recreational drugs. These can make your PTSD worse.
  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Although traumatic events can cause distress, not all feelings of distress are symptoms of PTSD. Talk about your feelings with friends and relatives. If your symptoms do not improve soon or are making you very upset, contact your provider. Seek help right away if: You feel overwhelmed You are thinking of hurting yourself or anyone else You are unable to control your behavior You have other very upsetting symptoms of PTSD  Alternative Names 
 
 PTSD Images 
 
 
 Post-traumatic stress disorder 
 References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association.  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Dekel S, Gilbertson MW, Orr SP, Rauch SL, Wood NE, Pitman RK. Trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 34. Youngner CG, Rothbaum BO, Friedman MJ. Posttraumatic stress disorder. Generalized anxiety disorder. In: Gabbard GO, ed.  Gabbard's Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2014:chap 27. Read More 
 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Depression - overview 
 Stress and your health 
 Substance use 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
 Browse the Encyclopedia