
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) is a disorder of the kidneys that occurs after infection with certain strains of streptococcus bacteria. Causes 
 
 Post-streptococcal GN is a form of  glomerulonephritis . It is caused by an infection with a type of streptococcus bacteria. The infection does not occur in the kidneys, but in a different part of the body, such as the skin or throat. The strep bacterial infection causes the tiny blood vessels in the filtering units of the kidneys (glomeruli) to become inflamed. This makes the kidneys less able to filter the urine. Post-streptococcal GN is uncommon today because infections that can lead to the disorder are commonly treated with antibiotics. The disorder may develop 1 to 2 weeks after an untreated throat infection, or 3 to 4 weeks after a skin infection. It may occur in people of any age, but it most often occurs in children ages 6 through 10. Although skin and throat infections are common in children, post-streptococcal GN is a rare complication of these infections. Risk factors include: Strep throat Streptococcal skin infections (such as  impetigo ) Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Decreased urine output Rust-colored urine Swelling (edema), general swelling, swelling of the abdomen, swelling of the face or eyes, swelling of the feet, ankles, hands
    Visible  blood in the urine Joint pain Joint stiffness  or swelling Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination shows swelling (edema), especially in the face. Abnormal sounds may be heard when listening to the heart and lungs with a stethoscope ( auscultation ). Blood pressure is often high. Other tests that may be done include: Anti-DNase B Kidney biopsy  (this is usually not needed) Serum ASO  (and streptolysin O) Serum complement levels Urinalysis Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for this disorder. Treatment is focused on relieving symptoms. Antibiotics, such as penicillin, will likely be used to destroy any streptococcal bacteria that remain in the body. Blood pressure medicines and diuretic drugs may be needed to control swelling and high blood pressure. Corticosteroids and other anti-inflammatory medicines are generally not effective. You may need to limit salt in the diet to control swelling and high blood pressure. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Post-streptococcal GN usually goes away by itself after several weeks to months. In small number of adults, it may get worse and lead to long-term (chronic) kidney failure. Sometimes, it can progress to end-stage kidney disease, which requires dialysis and a kidney transplant. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may result from this disorder include: Acute renal failure Chronic glomerulonephritis Chronic renal disease Congestive heart failure  or  pulmonary edema End-stage renal disease Hyperkalemia High blood pressure (hypertension) Nephrotic syndrome When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You have symptoms of post-streptococcal GN You have post-streptococcal GN, and you have decreased urine output or other new symptoms Prevention 
 
 Treating known streptococcal infections may help prevent post-streptococcal GN. Alternative Names 
 
 Glomerulonephritis - post-streptococcal; Post-infectious glomerulonephritis  Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Meyrier A. Postinfectious glomerulonephritis. In: Gilbert SJ, Weiner DE, eds.  National Kidney Foundation Primer on Kidney Diseases . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 22. Pan CG, Avner ED. Glomerulonephritis associated with infections. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme, JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 511. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Antibody 
 Antigen 
 Complement 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Heart failure - overview 
 High blood pressure 
 High potassium level 
 Impetigo 
 Pulmonary edema 
 Strep throat 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Streptococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia