
 Potter syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Potter syndrome and Potter phenotype refers to a group of findings associated with a lack of  amniotic fluid  and  kidney failure  in an unborn infant.  Causes 
 
 In Potter syndrome, the primary problem is kidney failure. The kidneys fail to develop properly as the baby is growing in the womb. The kidneys normally produce the amniotic fluid (as urine). Potter phenotype refers to a typical facial appearance that occurs in a newborn when there is no amniotic fluid. The lack of amniotic fluid is called oligohydramnios. Without amniotic fluid, the infant is not cushioned from the walls of the uterus. The pressure of the uterine wall leads to an unusual facial appearance, including widely separated eyes. Potter phenotype may also lead to abnormal limbs, or limbs that are held in abnormal positions or  contractures . Oligohydramnios also stops development of the lungs, so the lungs do not work properly at birth.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Widely separated eyes with  epicanthal folds ,  broad nasal bridge ,  low set ears , and  receding chin Absence of urine output Difficulty breathing Exams and Tests 
 
 A pregnancy  ultrasound  may show lack of amniotic fluid, absence of fetal kidneys, or severely abnormal kidneys in the unborn baby. The following tests may be used to help diagnose the condition in a newborn: X-ray of the abdomen X-ray of the lungs Treatment 
 
 Resuscitation at delivery may be attempted pending the diagnosis. Treatment will be provided for any urinary outlet obstruction. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This is a very serious condition. Most of the time it is deadly. The short-term outcome depends on the severity of lung involvement. Long-term outcome depends on the severity of kidney involvement. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Potter phenotype Images 
 
 
 Amniotic fluid 
 Broad nasal bridge 
 References 
 
 Copelovitch L, Kaplan BS. Developmental abnormalities of the kidneys. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU eds.  Avery's diseases of the newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 83. Elder JS. Congenital anomalies and dysgenesis of the kidneys. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 537. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Amniotic fluid 
 Broad nasal bridge 
 Contracture deformity 
 Epicanthal folds 
 Low-set ears and pinna abnormalities 
 Micrognathia 
 Renal 
 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia