
 Precocious puberty 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Puberty is the time during which a person's sexual and physical characteristics mature. Precocious puberty is when these body changes happen earlier than normal. Causes 
 
 Puberty usually begins between ages 8 and 14 for girls and ages 9 and 16 for boys. The exact age a child enters puberty depends on a number of factors, including family history, nutrition, and gender. Often there is no clear cause for precocious puberty. Some cases are due to changes in the brain, genetic problems, or certain tumors that release hormones. These conditions include: Disorders of the testicles, ovaries, or adrenal glands Tumor of the  hypothalamus  (hypothalamic hamartoma) Tumors that release a hormone called hCG Symptoms 
 
 In girls, precocious puberty is when any of the following develop before age 8: Armpit or pubic hair Beginning to grow faster Breasts First period (menstruation) Mature outer genitals In boys, precocious puberty is when any of the following develop before age 9: Armpit or pubic hair Growth of the testes and penis Facial hair, often first on the upper lip Muscle growth Voice change (deepening) Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor will perform a physical exam to check for signs of precocious puberty. Tests that may be ordered include: Blood tests to check hormone levels CT  or  MRI  scan of the brain or of the  abdomen  to rule out tumors. Treatment 
 
 Depending on the cause, treatment for precocious puberty may include: Medicines to stop the release of sexual hormones Surgery to remove a tumor Possible Complications 
 
 Children who go through puberty too early may not reach their full height because growth stops too early. Children with early sexual development may have psychological and social problems. Children and adolescents want to be the same as their peers. Early sexual development can make them appear different. Parents can support their child by explaining the condition and how the doctor plans to treat it. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your child's health care provider if: Your child shows signs of precocious puberty Any child with early sexual development appears to be having problems in school or with peers Alternative Names 
 
 Pubertas praecox Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Male and female reproductive systems 
 References 
 
 Garibaldi L, Chemaitilly W. Disorders of pubertal development. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 562. Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Precocious puberty. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 121. 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Puberty 
 Browse the Encyclopedia