
 Premenstrual syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) refers to a wide range of symptoms. The symptoms start during the second half of the menstrual cycle (14 or more days after the first day of your last menstrual period). These usually go away 1 to 2 days after the menstrual period starts. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of PMS is not known. Changes in brain hormone levels may play a role. However, this has not been proven. Women with PMS may also respond differently to these hormones. PMS may be related to social, cultural, biological, and psychological factors. Most women experience PMS symptoms during their childbearing years. PMS occurs more often in women: Between their late 20s and late 40s Who have had at least one child With a personal or family history of  major depression With a history of  postpartum depression  or an affective mood disorder  The symptoms often get worse in a woman's late 30s and 40s as menopause approaches. Symptoms 
 
 The most common symptoms of PMS include: Bloating  or  feeling gassy Breast tenderness Clumsiness Constipation  or  diarrhea Food cravings Headache Less tolerance for noises and lights  Other symptoms include: Confusion, trouble concentrating, or forgetfulness Fatigue  and feeling slow or sluggish Feelings of sadness or hopelessness Feelings of tension, anxiety, or edginess Irritable, hostile, or aggressive behavior, with outbursts of anger toward self or others Loss of sex drive (may increase in some women) Mood swings Poor judgment Poor self-image, feelings of guilt, or increased fears Sleep problems (sleeping too much or too little)  Exams and Tests 
 
 There are no specific signs or lab tests that can diagnose PMS. To rule out other possible causes of symptoms, it is important to have a:  Complete medical history Physical exam (including pelvic exam) A symptom calendar can help women identify the most troublesome symptoms. This also helps in confirming the diagnosis of PMS. Treatment 
 
 Keep a daily diary or log for at least 3 months. Record the: Type of symptoms you have How severe they are How long they last This record will help you and your health care provider find the best treatment. A healthy  lifestyle is the first step to managing PMS . For many women, lifestyle approaches are often enough to control symptoms. To manage PMS: Drink plenty of fluids like water or juice. Do not drink soft drinks, alcohol, or other beverages with caffeine. This will help reduce bloating, fluid retention, and other symptoms. Eat frequent, small meals. Do not go more than 3 hours between snacks. Avoid overeating. Eat a balanced diet. Include extra whole grains, vegetables, and fruit in your diet. Limit your intake of salt and sugar. Your provider may recommend that you take nutritional supplements.  Vitamin B6 , calcium, and magnesium are commonly used. Tryptophan, which is found in dairy products, may also be helpful. Get regular aerobic exercise throughout the month. This helps in reducing the severity of PMS symptoms. Exercise more often and harder during the weeks when you have PMS. Try changing your nighttime sleep habits before taking drugs for insomnia.  Symptoms such as  headache , backache,  menstrual cramping,  and  breast tenderness  may be treated with: Aspirin Ibuprofen Other NSAIDs Birth control pills may decrease or increase PMS symptoms. In severe cases, medicines to treat depression may be helpful. Antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are often tried first. These have been shown to be very helpful. You may also want to seek the advice of a counselor or therapist.  Other medicines that you may use include: Anti-anxiety drugs for severe anxiety Diuretics, which may help with severe fluid retention, which causes bloating, breast tenderness, and weight gain  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most women who are treated for PMS symptoms get good relief.  PMS symptoms may become severe enough to prevent you from functioning normally.  The suicide rate in women with depression is much higher during the second half of the menstrual cycle. Mood disorders need to be diagnosed and treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Make an appointment with your provider if: PMS does not go away with self-treatment Your symptoms are so severe that they limit your ability to function You feel like you want to hurt yourself or others Alternative Names 
 
 PMS; Premenstrual dysphoric disorder; PMDD Images 
 
 
 Premenstrual bloating 
 Relieving PMS 
 References 
 
 Alvero R. Premenstrual syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2017 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017: 1031-1032. Biggs WS, Demuth RH. Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.  Am Fam Physician . 2011;84(8):918-924. PMID: 22010771.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22010771 . Marjoribanks J, Brown J, O'Brien PM, Wyatt K. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2013(6). PMID: 23744611.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23744611 . Read More 
 
 Major depression 
 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Premenstrual Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia