
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare infection that damages the material ( myelin ) that covers and protects nerves in the  white matter of the brain . Causes 
 
 The John Cunningham virus, or JC virus (JCV) causes PML. By age 10, most people have been infected with this virus. But it hardly ever causes symptoms. But, people with a weakened immune system are at risk of developing PML. Causes of a weakened immune system include: 
 HIV/ AIDS  (less common now because of better AIDS treatments). Certain medicines that suppress the immune system. Such medicines may be used to prevent organ transplant rejection or to treat multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and related conditions. Cancers, such as leukemia and Hodgkin lymphoma. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: 
   Loss of coordination, clumsiness
    
   Loss of language ability (aphasia)
    
   Memory loss
    
   Vision problems
    
   Weakness of the legs and arms that gets worse
    Personality changes Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms. Tests may include: Brain biopsy (in rare cases) Cerebrospinal fluid test for the JCV CT scan of the brain Electroencephalogram  (EEG)
    MRI  of the brain Treatment 
 
 In people with HIV/AIDS, treatment to strengthen the immune system can lead to recovery from the symptoms of PML. No other treatments have proved effective for PML. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 PML is a life-threatening condition. Depending on how severe the infection is, up to one half of people diagnosed with PML die within the first few months.Talk to your provider about care decisions. Alternative Names 
 
 PML; John Cunningham virus; JCV Images 
 
 
 Gray and white matter of the brain 
 Leukoencephalopathy 
 References 
 
 Berger JR, Nath A. Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and slow virus infections of the central nervous system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 370. Tan CS, Koralnik IJ. JC, BK, and other polyomaviruses: progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 147. Read More 
 
 Headache 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Movement - uncoordinated 
 Visual field 
 Weakness 
 White matter of the brain 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Degenerative Nerve Diseases 
 HIV/AIDS and Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia