
 Progeria 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Progeria is a rare genetic condition that produces rapid aging in children. Causes 
 
 Progeria is a rare condition. It is remarkable because its symptoms strongly resemble normal human aging, but it occurs in young children. In most cases, it is not passed down through families. It is rarely seen in more than 1 child in a family. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Growth failure during the first year of life Narrow, shrunken or wrinkled face Baldness Loss of eyebrows and eyelashes Short stature Large head for size of face ( macrocephaly ) Open soft spot (fontanelle) Small jaw ( micrognathia ) Dry, scaly, thin skin Limited range of motion Teeth - delayed or absent formation Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and order laboratory tests. This may show: Insulin resistance Skin changes similar to that seen in scleroderma (the connective tissue becomes tough and hardened) Generally normal cholesterol and triglyceride levels  Cardiac stress testing may reveal signs of early atherosclerosis of blood vessels. Genetic testing can detect changes in the gene ( LMNA ) that causes progeria. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for progeria. Aspirin and statin medicines may be used to protect against a heart attack or stroke. Support Groups 
 
 Progeria Research Foundation, Inc. --  www.progeriaresearch.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Progeria causes early death. People with the condition most often only live to their teenage years (average lifespan of 13 years). However, some can live into their early 20s. The cause of death is very often related to the heart or a  stroke . Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Heart attack ( myocardial infarction) Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child does not appear to be growing or developing normally. Alternative Names 
 
 Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome; HGPS Images 
 
 
 Coronary artery blockage 
 References 
 
 Gordon LB, Brown WT, Collins FS. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.  Gene Reviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington: 2015:1. PMID: 20301300  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301300 . Accessed August 1, 2015. 
 Read More 
 
 Failure to thrive 
 Heart attack 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Genetic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia