
 Propyl alcohol 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Propyl alcohol is a clear liquid commonly used as a germ killer (antiseptic). This article discusses poisoning from swallowing propyl alcohol. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
 Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Isopropyl alcohol Where Found 
 
 Rubbing alcohol Alcohol swabs Skin and hair products Nail polish remover  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Coma Dizziness Headache Lethargy (tiredness) Low blood pressure Low urine output Nausea and vomiting Reflexes do not respond Slowed or labored breathing Stupor (decreased level of alertness) Uncoordinated movements Vomiting blood Home Care 
 
  Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths if known) When it was swallowed The amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room  
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 Propyl alcohol poisoning is very rarely deadly. Long term effects are possible, including kidney failure which could require dialysis (kidney machine). References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 1/17/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia