
 Propane poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Propane is a colorless and odorless flammable gas that can turn into liquid under very cold temperatures.  This article discusses the harmful effects from breathing in or swallowing propane. Breathing in or swallowing propane can be harmful. Propane takes the place of oxygen in the lungs. This makes breathing difficult or impossible. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms depend on the type of contact, but may include: Burning sensation Convulsions Cough Diarrhea Dizziness Fever General weakness Headache Heartbeat - irregular Heartbeat - rapid Light-headedness Loss of consciousness Nausea and vomiting Nervousness Pain and numbness in arms and legs Skin irritation Slow and shallow breathing Unconsciousness Weakness  Touching propane results in  frostbite -like symptoms. Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air. If the person does not improve rapidly after moving to fresh air, call your local emergency number (such as 911). If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does depends on the type of contact with the poison, and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better. Those with short exposures may have temporary headaches or other mild nervous system symptoms. Stroke, coma, or death may occur with long-term exposure. References 
 
 Nelson LS, Hoffman RS. Inhaled toxins. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 159. 
 Review Date 1/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia