
 Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a genetic disorder in which the body fails to respond to  parathyroid hormone .  A related condition is  hypoparathyroidism , in which the body does not make enough parathyroid hormone.  Causes 
 
 The parathyroid glands produce parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH helps control calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels in the blood and bone. If you have PHP, your body produces the right amount of PTH, but is "resistant" to its effect. This causes low blood calcium levels and high blood phosphate levels. PHP is caused by abnormal genes. There are different types of PHP. All forms are rare. Type Ia is inherited in an  autosomal dominant manner . That means only one parent needs to pass you the faulty gene for you to have the condition. It is also called Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. The condition causes short stature, round face, obesity, developmental delay, and short hand bones. Symptoms depend on whether you inherit the gene from your mother or father. Type Ib involves resistance to PTH only in the kidneys. Less is known about type Ib than type Ia. Calcium in the blood is low, but there are no symptoms of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Type II also involves low blood calcium and high blood phosphate levels. People with this form do not have the physical traits common to people with Type Ia. The genetic abnormality that causes it is not known.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are related to a low level of calcium and include: Cataracts Dental problems Numbness Seizures Tetany (a collection of symptoms including muscle twitches and hand and foot spasms)  People with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy may have the following symptoms: Calcium deposits under the skin Dimples that can replace knuckles on affected fingers Round face and short neck Short hand bones, especially the bone below the 4th finger Short height  Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests will be done to check calcium,  phosphorus , and PTH levels. You may also need urine tests. Other tests may include: Genetic testing Head MRI  or  CT scan of the brain Treatment 
 
 Your health care provider will recommend calcium and vitamin D supplements to maintain a proper calcium level. If the blood phosphate level is high, you may need to follow a low-phosphorus diet or take medicines called phosphate binders (such as calcium carbonate or calcium acetate). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Low blood calcium in PHP is usually milder than in other forms of hypoparathyroidism. Possible Complications 
 
 People with type Ia PHP are more likely to have other endocrine system problems (such as  hypothyroidism  and  hypogonadism ). PHP may be connected to other hormone problems, resulting in: Low sex drive Slow sexual development Low energy levels Weight gain  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you or your child have any symptoms of a low calcium level or pseudohypoparathyroidism. Alternative Names 
 
 Albright hereditary osteodystrophy; Types 1A and 1B pseudohypoparathyroidism; PHP Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Parathyroid glands 
 References 
 
 

Bastepe M, Juppner H. Pseudohypoparathyroidism, Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy, and progressive osseous heteroplasia. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 66. Doyle DA. Pseudohypoparathyroidism (Albright hereditary osteodystrophy). In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 572. Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 245. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Hypogonadism 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) blood test 
 Renal 
 
 Review Date 5/2/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Metabolic Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia