
 Pulmonary nocardiosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary nocardiosis is an infection of the lung with the bacteria,  Nocardia asteroides . Causes 
 
 Nocardia infection develops when you breathe in (inhale) the bacteria. The infection causes  pneumonia -like symptoms. The infection can spread to any part of the body. People with a weak immune system are at a high risk for nocardia infection. This includes people who have: Been taking steroids or other medicines that weaken the immune system for a long time Cushing disease An organ transplant HIV/AIDS Lymphoma Other people at risk include those with long-term (chronic) lung problems related to smoking, emphysema, or other  tuberculosis . Symptoms 
 
 Pulmonary nocardiosis mainly affects the lungs. But, it can also spread to other organs in the body. Common symptoms may include: ENTIRE BODY Fever  (comes and goes) General ill feeling ( malaise ) Night sweats  GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM  Nausea Liver and spleen swelling ( hepatosplenomegaly ) Unintentional weight loss Vomiting  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS  Breathing difficulty Chest pain not due to heart problems Coughing up blood or mucus Rapid breathing Shortness of breath MUSCLES AND JOINTS  Joint pain NERVOUS SYSTEM  Change in mental state Confusion Dizziness Headache Seizures  SKIN  Skin rashes or lumps Skin sores (abscesses) Swollen lymph nodes Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and listen to your lungs using a stethoscope. You may have abnormal lung sounds, called crackles. Tests that may be done include: Bronchoalveolar lavage -- fluid is sent for stain and culture, which is taken by  bronchoscopy Chest x-ray CT scan  of the chest Pleural fluid culture  and stain Sputum stain and culture  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to control the infection. Antibiotics are used, but it may take a while to get better. You're provider will tell you how long you need to take the medicines. This may be for up to a year.  Surgery may be needed to remove or drain infected areas. Your provider may tell you to stop taking any medicines that weaken your immune system. Never stop taking any medicine before talking to your provider first. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is often good when the condition is diagnosed and treated quickly. The outcome is poor when the infection: Spreads outside the lung Treatment is delayed The person has a serious disease that leads to or requires long-term suppression of the immune system Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of pulmonary nocardiosis may include: Brain abscesses Skin infections When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Early diagnosis and treatment may improve the chance of a good outcome. Prevention 
 
 Be careful when using corticosteroids. Use these drugs sparingly, in the lowest effective doses and for the shortest periods of time possible. Some people with a weak immune system may need to take antibiotics for long periods of time to prevent the infection from returning. Alternative Names 
 
 Nocardiosis - pulmonary; Mycetoma; Nocardia Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Southwick FS. Nocardiosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 330. Torres A, Menendez R, Wunderink RG. Bacterial pneumonia and lung abscess. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Brain abscess 
 Chronic 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia