
 Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a very rare disease. It leads to high blood pressure in the lung arteries ( pulmonary hypertension ). Causes 
 
 In most cases, the cause of PVOD is unknown. The high blood pressure occurs in the pulmonary arteries. These lung arteries are directly connected to the right side of the heart. The condition may be related to a viral infection. It may occur as a complication of certain diseases such as  lupus ,  chemotherapy , or  bone marrow transplantation . The disorder is most common among children and young adults. As the disease gets worse, it causes: Narrowed pulmonary veins Pulmonary artery hypertension Congestion and swelling of the lungs Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Shortness of breath Fatigue on exertion Fainting Coughing up blood Difficulty breathing while lying flat Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The exam may reveal: 
   Increased pressure in the neck veins
    Clubbing  of the fingers
    Bluish coloration of the skin  due to lack of oxygen ( cyanosis ) 
   Swelling in the legs
    Your provider may hear abnormal  heart sounds  when listening to the chest and lungs with a stethoscope. The following tests may be done: Arterial blood gases Blood oximetry Chest x-ray Chest CT Cardiac catheterization Lung function tests Echocardiogram Lung biopsy  Treatment 
 
 There is currently no known effective medical treatment. However, the following medicines may be helpful for some people: Medicines that widen the blood vessels (vasodilators) Medicines that control the immune system response (such as azathioprine or steroids) A  lung transplant  may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is often very poor in infants, with a survival rate of just a few weeks. Survival in adults may be months to a few years.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of PVOD may include: Difficulty breathing  that gets worse, including at night ( sleep apnea ) Pulmonary hypertension Right-sided heart failure ( cor pulmonale ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Alternative Names 
 
 Pulmonary vaso-occlusive disease Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Chin K, Channick RN. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 58. Huertas A, Girerd B, Dorfmuller P, O'Callaghan D, Humbert M, Montani D. Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: advances in clinical management and treatments.  Expert Rev Respir Med . 2011;5(2):217-229. PMID: 21510732.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21510732 . Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pulmonary Hypertension 
 Browse the Encyclopedia