
 Pulmonary aspergilloma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary aspergilloma is a mass caused by a fungal infection. It usually grows in lung cavities. It can also appear in the brain, kidney, or other organs. Causes 
 
 Aspergillosis  is an infection caused by the fungus aspergillus. Aspergillomas are formed when the fungus grows in a clump in a lung cavity. The cavity is often created by a previous condition. Cavities in the lung may be caused by diseases such as: Tuberculosis Coccidioidomycosis Cystic fibrosis Histoplasmosis Lung abscess Lung cancer Sarcoidosis The most common species of fungus that causes disease in humans is  Aspergillus fumigatus .  
 Aspergillus is a common fungus. It grows on dead leaves, stored grain, bird droppings, compost piles, and other decaying vegetation. Symptoms 
 
 You may not have symptoms. When symptoms do develop, they can include: Chest pain Cough Coughing up blood , which can be a life-threatening sign Fatigue Fever Unintentional weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may suspect you have a fungal infection after x-rays of your lungs show the ball of fungus. Other tests that may be done include: Biopsy of lung tissue Blood test for presence of aspergillus in the body (galactomannan) Blood test to detect immune response to aspergillus (specific antibodies for aspergillus) Bronchoscopy  or bronchoscopy with lavage Chest CT Sputum culture Treatment 
 
 Many people never develop symptoms. Often, no treatment is needed, unless you are coughing up blood. Sometimes, antifungal medicines may be used. If you have bleeding in the lungs, your provider may inject dye into the blood vessels (angiography) to find the site of bleeding. The bleeding is stopped by either: Surgery to remove the aspergilloma Procedure that inserts material into the blood vessels ( embolization ) 
  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome can be good in many people. However, it depends on the severity of the condition and your overall health. Surgery may be very successful in some cases, but it is complex and can have a high risk of serious complications. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of pulmonary aspergilloma may include: Difficulty breathing  that gets worse Massive bleeding from the lung Spread of the infection When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your provider if you cough up blood, and mention any other symptoms that have developed. Prevention 
 
 People who have had related lung infections or who have weakened immune systems should try to avoid environments where the aspergillus fungus is found. Alternative Names 
 
 Fungus ball; Mycetoma; Aspergilloma; Aspergillosis - pulmonary aspergilloma Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray 
 Pulmonary nodule, solitary - CT scan 
 Aspergilloma 
 Pulmonary aspergillosis 
 Aspergillosis - chest x-ray 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Horan-Saullo JL, Alexander BD. Opportunistic mycoses. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 38. Walsh TJ. Aspergillosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 339. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Aspergillosis 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Histoplasmosis 
 Lung cancer - small cell 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Aspergillosis 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia