
 Pulmonary valve stenosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pulmonary valve stenosis is a heart valve disorder that involves the pulmonary valve. This is the valve separating the right ventricle (one of the chambers in the heart) and the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary artery carries oxygen-poor blood to the lungs. Stenosis, or narrowing, occurs when the valve cannot open wide enough. As a result, less blood flows to the lungs. Causes 
 
 Narrowing of the pulmonary valve is most often present at birth (congenital). It is caused by a problem that occurs as the baby develops in the womb before birth. The cause is unknown, but genes may play a role. Narrowing that occurs in the valve itself is called pulmonary valve stenosis. There may also be narrowing just before or after the valve.  The defect may occur alone or with other heart defects that are present at birth. The condition can be mild or severe. Pulmonary valve stenosis is a rare disorder. In some cases, the problem runs in families. Symptoms 
 
 Many cases of pulmonary valve stenosis are mild and do not cause symptoms. The problem is most often found in infants when a heart murmur is heard during a routine heart exam.  When the valve narrowing (stenosis) is moderate to severe, the symptoms include: Abdominal distention Bluish color to the skin  (cyanosis) in some people Poor appetite Chest pain Fainting Fatigue Poor weight gain or  failure to thrive  in infants with a severe blockage Shortness of breath Sudden death  Symptoms may get worse with exercise or activity. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider may hear a  heart murmur  when listening to the heart using a stethoscope. Murmurs are blowing, whooshing, or rasping sounds heard during a heartbeat. Tests used to diagnose pulmonary stenosis may include: Cardiac catheterization Chest x-ray ECG Echocardiogram MRI of the heart The provider will grade the severity of the valve stenosis to plan treatment.  Treatment 
 
 Sometimes, treatment may not be needed if the disorder is mild. When there are also other heart defects, medicines may be used to: Help blood flow through the heart (prostaglandins) Help the heart beat stronger Prevent clots (blood thinners) Remove excess fluid (water pills) Treat abnormal heartbeats and rhythms  Percutaneous balloon pulmonary dilation (valvuloplasty) may be performed when no other heart defects are present.  This procedure is done through an artery in the groin. The doctor sends a flexible tube (catheter) with a balloon attached to the end up to the heart. Special x-rays are used to help guide the catheter. The balloon stretches the opening of the valve.  Some people may need heart surgery to repair or replace the pulmonary valve. The new valve can be made from different materials. If the valve cannot be repaired or replaced, other procedures may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with mild disease rarely get worse. However, those with moderate to severe disease will get worse. The outcome is often very good when surgery or balloon dilation is successful. Other congenital heart defects may be a factor in the outlook. Most often, the new valves can last for decades. However, some will wear out and need to be replaced. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Abnormal heartbeats ( arrhythmias ) Death Heart failure  and enlargement of the right side of the heart
    Leaking of blood back into the right ventricle (pulmonary regurgitation) after repair When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of pulmonary valve stenosis. You have been treated or have untreated pulmonary valve stenosis and have developed swelling (of the ankles, legs, or abdomen), difficulty breathing, or other new symptoms.  Alternative Names 
 
 Valvular pulmonary stenosis; Heart valve pulmonary stenosis; Pulmonary stenosis; Stenosis - pulmonary valve; Balloon valvuloplasty - pulmonary Images 
 
 
 Heart valves 
 References 
 
 Carabello BA. Valvular heart disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 75. Marelli AJ. Congenital heart disease in adults. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 69. Otto CM, Bownow RO. Valvular heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 63. Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, Redington AN. Congenital heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Endocarditis 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Rheumatic fever 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Heart valve surgery - discharge  
 Review Date 5/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Heart Valve Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia