
 Pulse - bounding 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A bounding  pulse  is a strong throbbing felt over one of the arteries in the body. It is due to a forceful heartbeat. Causes 
 
 A bounding pulse and rapid heart rate both occur in the following conditions or events: Abnormal or rapid heart rhythms Anemia Anxiety Chronic kidney disease Heart failure Heart valve problem called aortic regurgitation Heavy exercise Fever Pregnancy, because of increased fluid and blood in the body Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if the intensity or rate of your pulse increases suddenly and does not go away. This is very important when: You have other symptoms along with increased pulse. The change in your pulse does not go away when you rest for a few minutes. You already have been diagnosed with a heart problem. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will do a physical exam that includes checking your temperature, pulse, rate of breathing, and blood pressure. Your heart and circulation will also be checked.  Your provider will ask questions such as: Is this the first time you have felt a bounding pulse? Did it develop suddenly or gradually? Is it always present, or does it come and go? Does it only happen along with other symptoms, such as palpitations? What other symptoms do you have? Does it get better if you rest? Are you pregnant? Have you had a fever? Have you been very anxious or stressed? Do you have other heart problems, such as heart valve disease, high blood pressure, or congestive heart failure? Do you have kidney failure? The following diagnostic tests may be performed: Blood studies ( CBC  or  blood count ) Chest x-ray ECG  (electrocardiogram) Echocardiogram Alternative Names 
 
 Bounding pulse Images 
 
 
 Taking your carotid pulse 
 References 
 
 Fang JC, O'Gara PT. The history and physical examination. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 11. Goldman L. Approach to the patient with possible cardiovascular disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Arrhythmias 
 Heart palpitations 
 Pulse 
 
 Review Date 5/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Heart Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia