
 Pupil - white spots 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 White spots in the pupil is a condition that causes the pupil of the eye to look white instead of black. Considerations 
 
 The pupil of the human eye is normally black. In flash photographs the pupil may appear red. This is called the "red reflex" by health care providers and is normal. Sometimes, the pupil of the eye may appear white, or the normal red reflex may appear to be white. This not a normal condition, and you need to see an eye care provider right away. There are many different causes of white pupil or white reflex. Other conditions also can mimic white pupil. If the cornea, which is normally clear, becomes cloudy, it may look similar to a white pupil. Although the causes of a cloudy or white cornea are different from those of a white pupil or white reflex, these problems also need medical attention right away. Cataracts  may also cause the pupil to appear white. Causes 
 
 Causes of this condition may include: Coats' disease - exudative retinopathy Coloboma Congenital cataract  (may be hereditary or may result from other conditions, including  congenital rubella ,  galactosemia ,  retrolental fibroplasia ) Persistent primary hyperplastic vitreous Retinoblastoma Toxocara canis (infection caused by a parasite) Uveitis Home Care 
 
 Most causes of white pupil will cause decreased vision. This may often occur before the pupil appears to be white.  Detecting a white pupil is especially important in infants. Babies are unable to communicate to others that their vision is decreased. It is also harder to measure an infant's vision during an eye exam. If you see a white pupil, call your health care provider right away. Well-child exams routinely screen for a white pupil in children. A child that develops a white pupil or cloudy cornea needs immediate attention, preferably from an eye specialist. It is important to get diagnosed early if the problem is caused by retinoblastoma since this disease can be fatal. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you notice any color changes in the pupil or cornea of the eye. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history.  The physical exam will include a detailed eye examination. The following tests may be performed: Ophthalmoscopy Slit-lamp exam Standard eye exam Visual acuity Other tests may that be done include a  head CT  or  MRI scan . Alternative Names 
 
 Leukocoria Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 White spots in the pupil 
 White pupil 
 References 
 
 Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl ED, et al. Examination of the eye. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 619. Shields CL, Shields JA. Retinoblastoma. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 3;chap 35. Yanoff M, Cameron D. Disease of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Cataract - adult 
 Cloudy cornea 
 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia