
 Pyogenic granuloma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pyogenic granulomas are small, raised, and red bumps on the skin. The bumps have a smooth surface and may be moist. They bleed easily because of the high number of blood vessels at the site. It is a benign (noncancerous) growth. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of pyogenic granulomas is unknown. They often appear following an injury on the hands, arms, or face. Pyogenic granulomas are common in children. Symptoms 
 
 Signs of a pyrogenic granuloma are: A small red lump on the skin that bleeds easily Often found at the site of a recent injury Usually seen on hands, arms, and face, but they may develop in the mouth (most often in pregnant women)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to diagnose this condition. You may also need a  skin biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 Small pyogenic  granulomas  may go away suddenly. Larger bumps are treated with: Surgical shaving or excision Electrocautery  (heat)  Freezing A laser Creams applied to the skin (may not be as effective as surgery) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most pyogenic granulomas can be removed. A scar may remain after treatment. There is a high chance that the problem will come back if the whole granuloma is not destroyed during treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 These problems may occur: Bleeding from the granuloma Return of the condition after treatment  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have a skin bump that bleeds easily or that changes appearance. Alternative Names 
 
 Lobular capillary hemangioma Images 
 
 
 Pyogenic granuloma - close-up 
 Pyogenic granuloma on the hand 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 23. Patterson JW. Vascular tumors. In: Patterson J, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 38. 
 Review Date 10/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia