
 Radiation enteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Radiation  enteritis  is damage to the lining of the intestines (bowels) caused by  radiation therapy , which is a type of cancer treatment. Causes 
 
 Radiation therapy uses high-powered x-rays, particles, or radioactive seeds to kill cancer cells. The therapy may also damage healthy cells in the lining of the intestines. People who have radiation therapy to the belly or pelvic area are at risk. These may include people with cervical, pancreatic, prostate, uterine, or colon and rectal cancer. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may vary, depending on which part of the intestines received the radiation. Symptoms can be worse if: You have chemotherapy at the same time as the radiation. You receive stronger doses of radiation. A larger area of your intestines receives radiation. Symptoms may occur during or shortly after or long after radiation treatment. Changes in bowel movements may include: Bleeding or mucus from the rectum Diarrhea or watery stools Feeling the need to have a bowel movement most or all of the time Pain in the rectal area, especially during bowel movements  Other symptoms can include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting  Most of the time, these symptoms get better within 2 to 3 months after radiation treatment ends.  When symptoms become long-term (chronic), other problems may include: Abdominal pain Bloody diarrhea Greasy or fatty stools Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your medical history. Tests may include: Barium x-ray  examination Sigmoidoscopy  or  colonoscopy Upper endoscopy Treatment 
 
 Starting a low-fiber diet on the first day of radiation treatment may help you avoid problems. The best choice of foods depends on your symptoms.  Some things can make symptoms worse, and should be avoided. These include:  Alcohol and tobacco Almost all milk products Coffee, tea, chocolate, and sodas with caffeine Foods containing whole bran Fresh and dried fruits Fried, greasy, or fatty foods Nuts and seeds Popcorn, potato chips, and pretzels Raw vegetables Rich pastries and baked goods Some fruit juices Strong spices  Foods and drinks that are better choices include: Apple or grape juice Applesauce, peeled apples, and bananas Eggs, buttermilk, and yogurt Fish, poultry, and meat that has been broiled or roasted Mild, cooked vegetables, such as asparagus tips, green or black beans, carrots, spinach, and squash Potatoes that have been baked, boiled, or mashed Processed cheeses, such as American cheese Smooth peanut butter White bread, macaroni, or noodles  Your provider may have you use certain medicines such as: Drugs that help decrease diarrhea, such as loperamide Pain medicines Steroid foam that coats the lining of the rectum Special enzymes to replace enzymes from the pancreas  Other things you can do include: Eat foods at room temperature. Eat small meals more often. Drink plenty of fluids, up to 12 8-ounce (240 milliter) glasses every day when you have diarrhea. Some people will need fluids given through a vein (intravenous fluids). Your provider may choose to decrease your radiation for a short period of time. There often are no good treatments for chronic radiation enteritis that is more severe. Medicines such as cholestyramine, diphenoxylate-atropine, loperamide, or sucralfate may help. You may need to consider surgery to either remove or go around (bypass) a section of damaged intestine. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 When the abdomen receives radiation, there is always some nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. In most cases, the symptoms get better within 2 to 3 months after treatment ends. However, when this condition develops, symptoms may last for a long period of time. Long-term (chronic) enteritis is rarely curable. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding and  anemia Dehydration Iron deficiency Malabsorption Malnutrition Weight loss  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you are having radiation therapy or have had it in the past and are having a lot of diarrhea or stomach pain and cramping. Alternative Names 
 
 Radiation enteropathy; Radiation-induced small bowel injury; Post-radiation enteritis Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Kuemmerle JF. Inflammatory and anatomic diseases of the intestine, peritoneum, mesentery, and omentum. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 142. Palta M, Willet CG, Czito BG. Radiation injury. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 40. National Cancer Institute. Gastrointestinal complications PDQ. Updated May 12, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/constipation/GI-complications-pdq . Accessed May 24, 2016. Read More 
 
 Enteritis 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colorectal Cancer 
 Intestinal Cancer 
 Mesothelioma 
 Ovarian Cancer 
 Radiation Therapy 
 Stomach Cancer 
 Uterine Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia