
 Rapid shallow breathing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A normal breathing rate for an adult at rest is 8 to 16 breaths per minute. For an infant, a normal rate is up to 44 breaths per minute. Tachypnea is the term that your health care provider uses to describe your breathing if it is too fast, especially if you have fast, shallow breathing from a lung disease or other medical cause. The term  hyperventilation  is usually used if you are taking rapid, deep breaths. This can be due to lung disease or because of anxiety or panic. The terms are sometimes used interchangeably. Causes 
 
 Shallow, rapid breathing has many possible medical causes, including: Asthma Blood clot in an artery in the lung Choking Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) and other chronic lung diseases Heart failure Infection in the smallest air passages of the lungs in children ( bronchiolitis ) Pneumonia  or other lung infection Transient tachypnea  of the newborn Anxiety Home Care 
 
 Rapid, shallow breathing should not be treated at home. It is generally considered a medical emergency (unless anxiety is the only cause). If you have asthma or COPD, use your inhaler medicines as prescribed by your provider. You may still need to be checked by a provider right away if you have rapid shallow breathing. Your provider will explain when it is important to go to the emergency room. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call 911 or go to the emergency room if you are breathing rapidly and you have: Bluish or grayish color to the skin, nails, gums, lips, or the area around the eyes (cyanosis) Chest pain Chest that is pulling in with each breath Fever Labored or difficult breathing Never had rapid breathing before Symptoms that are getting more severe What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a thorough exam of your heart, lungs, abdomen, and head and neck. Tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gas  and pulse oximetry to check your oxygen level Chest x-ray Chest CT scan Complete blood count  (CBC) and blood chemistries ECG Ventilation/perfusion scan of your lungs Treatment will depend on the underlying cause of the rapid breathing. Treatment may include oxygen if your oxygen level is too low and nebulized respiratory treatments if you are having an asthma or a COPD attack. Alternative Names 
 
 Tachypnea; Breathing - rapid and shallow; Fast shallow breathing; Respiratory rate - rapid and shallow Images 
 
 
 Diaphragm 
 Diaphragm and lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Kraft M. Approach to the patient with respiratory diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer Al, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 83. Read More 
 
 Hyperventilation 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia