
 RBC count 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An RBC count is a blood test that measures how many red blood cells (RBCs) you have. RBCs contain  hemoglobin , which carries oxygen. How much oxygen your body tissues get depends on how many RBCs you have and how well they work. Watch this video about: Red blood cell production How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The RBC count is almost always part of a complete blood count ( CBC ) test. The test can help diagnose different kinds of  anemia  (low number of RBCs) and other conditions affecting red blood cells. Other conditions that may require an RBC count are: Disease that damages kidney blood vessels ( Alport syndrome ) White blood cell cancer ( Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia ) Disorder in which red blood cells break down earlier than normal ( paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria ) Bone marrow disorder in which the marrow is replaced by scar tissue (myelofibrosis)  Normal Results 
 
 Normal RBC ranges are: Male: 4.7 to 6.1 million cells per microliter (cells/mcL) Female: 4.2 to 5.4 million cells/mcL The ranges above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Higher than normal numbers of RBCs may be due to: Cigarette smoking Problem with heart's structure and function that is present at birth ( congenital heart disease ) Failure of the right side of the heart ( cor pulmonale ) Dehydration  (for example, from severe diarrhea) Kidney tumor (renal cell carcinoma) Low blood oxygen level (hypoxia) Scarring or thickening of the lungs ( pulmonary fibrosis ) Bone marrow disease that causes abnormal increase in RBCs ( polycythemia vera )  Your RBC count will increase for several weeks when you are in a higher altitude. Drugs that can increase the RBC count include: Gentamicin Methyldopa  Lower-than-normal numbers of RBCs may be due to: Anemia Bleeding Bone marrow failure (for example, from radiation, toxins, or tumor) Deficiency of a hormone called erythropoietin (caused by kidney disease) RBC destruction ( hemolysis ) due to transfusion, blood vessel injury, or other cause Leukemia Malnutrition Bone marrow cancer called  multiple myeloma Too little iron,  copper , folic acid,  vitamin B6 , or  vitamin B12  in the diet Too much water in the body (overhydration) Pregnancy  Drugs that can decrease the RBC count include: Chemotherapy drugs Chloramphenicol Hydantoins Quinidine  Risks 
 
 There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Erythrocyte count; Red blood cell count; Anemia - RBC count Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Formed elements of blood 
 High blood pressure tests 
 References 
 
 Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 158. Goljan EF. Red blood cell disorders. In: Goljan EF, ed.  Rapid Review Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Alport syndrome 
 Anemia 
 CBC blood test 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Dehydration 
 Erythropoietin test 
 Folic acid in diet 
 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
 Hemoglobin 
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
 Immune hemolytic anemia 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Myelofibrosis 
 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) 
 Peripheral 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Renal cell carcinoma 
 Splenomegaly 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic 
 Vitamin B12 
 Vitamin B6 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Count Tests 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia