
 RBC nuclear scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An RBC nuclear scan uses small amounts of radioactive material to mark (tag) red blood cells (RBCs). Your body is then scanned to see the cells and track how they move through the body. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The procedure for this test may vary a little. This depends on the reason for the scan. The RBCs are tagged with  radioisotope  in 1 of 2 ways. The first method involves removing blood from a vein.  The red blood cells are separated from the rest of the blood sample. The cells are then mixed with the radioactive material. The cells with the radioactive material are considered "tagged." A short time later the tagged RBCs are injected into one of your veins. The second method involves an injection of medicine. The medicine allows the radioactive material to attach to your red blood cells. The radioactive material is injected into a vein 15 or 20 minutes after you receive this medicine.  Scanning may be done right away or after a delay. For the scan, you will lie on a table under a special camera. The camera detects the location and amount of radiation given off by the tagged cells. A series of scans may be done. The specific areas scanned depend on the reason for the test. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You will need to sign a consent form. You put on a hospital gown and take off jewelry or metallic objects before the scan. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel a little pain when the needle is inserted to draw blood or to give the injection. Afterward, there may be some throbbing. The  x-rays  and radioactive material are painless. Some people may have discomfort from lying on the hard table. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is most often done to find the site of bleeding. It is done in people who have blood loss from the colon or other parts of the gastrointestinal tract. A similar test called a ventriculogram may be done to check heart function. Normal Results 
 
 A normal exam shows no rapid bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 There is active bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract. Risks 
 
 Slight risks from having blood drawn include: Fainting  or feeling lightheaded Hematoma  (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Very rarely, a person may have an  allergic reaction  to the radioisotope. This may include  anaphylaxis  if the person is very sensitive to the substance. You will be exposed to a small amount of radiation from the radioisotope. The materials break down very quickly. Almost all radioactivity will be gone within 1 or 2 days. The scanner does not give off any radiation. Most nuclear scans (including an RBC scan) are not recommended for women who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Considerations 
 
 Scans may need to be repeated over 1 or 2 days to detect  gastrointestinal bleeding . Alternative Names 
 
 Bleeding scan, Tagged RBC scan; Hemorrhage - RBC scan References 
 
 Hutton BF, Segerman D, Miles KA. Radionuclide and hybrid imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Chuchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 6. Kovacs TO, Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 135. Tavakkoli A, Ashley SW. Acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 46. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Hemangioma 
 Nuclear ventriculography 
 PET scan 
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Nuclear Scans 
 Browse the Encyclopedia