
 RBC indices 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Red blood cell (RBC) indices are part of the  complete blood count  (CBC) test. They are used to help diagnose the cause of anemia, a condition in which there are too few red blood cells. The indices include: Average red blood cell size (MCV) Hemoglobin  amount per red blood cell (MCH) The amount of hemoglobin relative to the size of the cell (hemoglobin concentration) per red blood cell (MCHC)  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Hemoglobin transports oxygen. RBCs carry hemoglobin and oxygen to our body's cells. The RBC indices test measures how well the RBCs do this. The results are used to diagnose different types of  anemia . Normal Results 
 
 These test results are in the normal range: MCV: 80 to 100 femtoliter MCH: 27 to 31 picograms/cell MCHC: 32 to 36 grams/deciliter (g/dL) or 320 to 360 grams per liter (g/L) The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your health care provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 These test results indicate the type of anemia: MCV below normal. Microcytic anemia (may be due to low iron levels, lead poisoning, or  thalassemia ). MCV normal. Normocytic anemia (may be due to sudden blood loss, long-term diseases,  kidney failure ,  aplastic anemia , or man-made heart valves). MCV above normal. Macrocytic anemia (may be due to low folate or B12 levels, or  chemotherapy ). MCH below normal. Hypochromic anemia (often due to low iron levels). MCH normal. Normochromic anemia (may be due to sudden blood loss, long-term diseases, kidney failure, aplastic anemia, or man-made heart valves). MCH above normal. Hyperchromic anemia (may be due to low folate or B12 levels, or chemotherapy).  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Erythrocyte indices; Blood indices; Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH); Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC); Mean corpuscular volume (MCV); Red blood cell indices References 
 
 Bunn HF. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 158. Goljan EF. Red blood cell disorders. In: Goljan E, ed.  Rapid Review Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Anemia 
 CBC blood test 
 Chemotherapy 
 Erythropoietin test 
 Folate deficiency 
 Heart valve surgery 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 RBC count 
 Sepsis 
 Thalassemia 
 Vitamin B12 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Count Tests 
 Blood Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia