
 Relapsing fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Relapsing fever is an infection transmitted by a louse or tick. It is characterized by repeated episodes of  fever . Causes 
 
 Relapsing fever is an infection caused by several species of bacteria in the  Borrelia  family. There are 2 major forms of relapsing fever: Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF) is transmitted by the  Ornithodoros  tick. It occurs in Africa, Spain, Saudi Arabia, Asia, and certain areas in the western United States and Canada. The bacteria species associated with TBRF are  Borrelia duttoni ,  Borrelia hermsii , and  Borrelia parkerii . Louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF) is transmitted by  body lice . It is most common in Asia, Africa, and Central and South America. The bacteria species associated with LBRF is  Borrelia recurrentis .  Sudden fever occurs within 2 weeks of infection.  In TRBF, multiple episodes of fever occur, and each may last up to 3 days. People may not have a fever for up to 2 weeks, and then it returns. In LBRF, the fever usually lasts 3 to 6 days. It is often followed by a single, milder episode of fever.  In both forms, the fever episode may end in "crisis." This consists of shaking chills, followed by intense sweating, falling body temperature, and low blood pressure. This stage may result in death. In the United States, TBRF often occurs west of the Mississippi River, particularly in the mountains of the West and the high deserts and plains of the Southwest. In the mountains of California, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington, infections are usually caused by  Borrelia hermsii  and are often picked up in cabins in forests. The risk may now extend into the southeastern United States. LBRF is mainly a disease of the developing world. It is currently seen in Ethiopia and Sudan. Famine, war, and the movement of refugee groups often results in LBRF epidemics. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of relapsing fever include: Bleeding Coma Headache Joint aches, muscle aches Nausea and vomiting Sagging on one side of the face (facial droop) Stiff neck Sudden high fever, shaking chills, seizure Vomiting Weakness, unsteady while walking  Exams and Tests 
 
 Relapsing fever should be suspected if someone coming from a high-risk area has repeated episodes of fever. This is especially true if the fever is followed by a "crisis" stage, and if the person may have been exposed to lice or soft-bodied ticks. Tests that may be done include: Blood smear to determine the cause of the infection Blood antibody tests (sometimes used, but their usefulness is limited)  Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to treat this condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The death rate for untreated LBRF ranges from 10 to 70%. With TBRF, it is 4 to 10%. With early treatment, the death rate is reduced. People with this condition who have developed a coma, heart inflammation, liver problems, or pneumonia are more likely to die. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur: Drooping of the face Coma Liver problems Inflammation of the thin tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord Inflammation of the heart muscle, which may lead to irregular heart rate  Pneumonia Seizures Stupor Shock related to taking antibiotics (Jarisch-Herxheimer's reaction, in which the rapid death of very large numbers of  Borrelia bacteria causes shock) Weakness Widespread bleeding  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider right away if you return from a trip and develop a fever. Possible infections need to be investigated in a timely manner. Prevention 
 
 Wearing clothing that fully covers the arms and legs when you are outdoors can help prevent TBRF infection. Insect repellent such as DEET on the skin and clothing also work. Tick and lice control in high-risk areas is another important public health measure. Alternative Names 
 
 Tick-borne relapsing fever; Louse-borne relapsing fever References 
 
 Horton JM. Relapsing fever caused by Borrelia species. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 242 Petri WA. Relapsing fever and other  Borrelia  infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011: chap 330. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Body lice 
 Central nervous system 
 Fever 
 Hepatitis 
 Myocarditis 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia