
 Renal pelvis or ureter cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cancer of the renal pelvis or ureter is cancer that forms in the kidney's pelvis or the tube (ureter) that carries urine from the kidney to the bladder. Causes 
 
 Cancer can grow in the urine collection system, but it is uncommon. Renal pelvis and ureter cancers affect men more often than women. These cancers are more common in people older than 65. The exact causes of this cancer are not known. Long-term (chronic) irritation of the kidney from harmful substances removed in the urine may be a factor. This irritation may be caused by: Kidney damage from medicines, especially ones for pain ( analgesic nephropathy ) Exposure to certain dyes and chemicals used to manufacture leather goods, textiles, plastics, and rubber Smoking  People who have had bladder cancer are also at risk. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Back pain, most often where ribs and spine meet Bloody urine Burning, pain, or  discomfort with urination Dark, rust-colored, or brown urine Fatigue Flank pain Weight loss  that can't be explained Urinary frequency or urgency Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam, and examine your belly area (abdomen). In rare cases, this may reveal an enlarged kidney. If tests are done: Urinalysis may show blood in the urine. A complete blood count ( CBC ) may show  anemia . Urine cytology  (microscopic examination of cells) may reveal cancer cells.  Other tests that may be ordered include: Abdominal CT scan Chest x-ray Cystoscopy with ureteroscopy Intravenous pyelogram  (IVP) Kidney ultrasound MRI of the abdomen Renal scan These tests may reveal a tumor or show that the cancer has spread from the kidneys. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to eliminate the cancer. Surgery to remove all or part of the kidney ( nephrectomy ) is often done. This may include removing part of the bladder and tissues around it, or the lymph nodes. If the  tumor  is in the ureter, it may be possible to remove it while preserving the kidney. When the cancer has spread outside of the kidney or ureter, chemotherapy is often used. Because these tumors are similar to a form of  bladder cancer , they are treated with a similar type of chemotherapy. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a cancer  support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome varies depending on the location of the tumor and whether the cancer has spread. Cancer that is only in the kidney or ureter may be cured with surgery. Cancer that has spread to other organs is usually not curable. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications from this cancer may include: Kidney failure Local spread of the tumor with increasing pain Spread of the cancer When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your provider if you have any of the symptoms listed above. Prevention 
 
 Measures that may help prevent this cancer include: Follow your provider's advice regarding medicines, including over-the-counter pain medicine. Stop smoking. Wear protective equipment if you are likely to be exposed to substances that are toxic to the kidneys. Alternative Names 
 
 Transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis or ureter; Kidney cancer - renal pelvis; Ureter cancer Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute. PDQ transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated October 1, 2015.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/transitionalcell/HealthProfessional . Accessed June 30, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): kidney cancer. Updated May 26, 2016. Version 3.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/kidney.pdf . Accessed June 30, 2016. Pili R, Kauffman E, Rodriguez R. Cancer of the kidney. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 82. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Cancer 
 Kidney Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia