
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Renal vein thrombosis is a  blood clot  that develops in the vein that drains blood from the kidney. Causes 
 
 Renal vein thrombosis is an uncommon disorder. It may be caused by: Abdominal aortic aneurysm Hypercoaguable state: clotting disorders Dehydration  (mostly in infants) Estrogen use Nephrotic syndrome Pregnancy Scar formation with pressure on the  renal  vein Trauma (to the back or abdomen) Tumor In adults, the most common cause is nephrotic syndrome. In infants, the most common cause is dehydration. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Blood clot to the lung Bloody urine Decreased urine output Flank pain  or low back pain  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam may not reveal the specific problem. However, it may indicate nephrotic syndrome or other causes of renal vein thrombosis. Tests include: Abdominal CT scan Abdominal MRI Abdominal ultrasound Duplex Doppler exam of the renal veins Urinalysis  may show  protein in the urine  or  red blood cells in the urine X-ray of the kidney veins (venography)  Treatment 
 
 The treatment is focused on preventing new clot formations and reducing the risk of the clot traveling to other locations in the body (embolization). You may get medicines that prevent blood clotting (anticoagulants). You may be told to rest in bed or cut down on activity for a short time.  If sudden kidney failure develops, you may need  dialysis  for a short period. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Renal vein thrombosis most often gets better over time without lasting damage to the kidneys. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute renal failure (especially if thrombosis occurs in a dehydrated child) End stage renal disease Blood clot moves to the lungs ( pulmonary embolism ) Formation of new blood clots  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of renal vein thrombosis. If you have experienced renal vein thrombosis, call your provider if you have: Decrease in urine output Breathing problems Other new symptoms  Prevention 
 
 In most cases, there is no specific way to prevent renal vein thrombosis. Keeping enough fluids in the body may help reduce risk. Aspirin is sometimes used to prevent renal vein thrombosis in people who have had a kidney transplant. Blood thinners such as warfarin may be recommended for some people with chronic kidney disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Blood clot in the renal vein; Occlusion - renal vein Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 References 
 
 DuBose TD Jr, Santos RM. Vascular disorders of the kidney In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 125. Ruggenenti P, Cravede P, Remuzzi G. Microvascular and macrovascular diseases of the kidney. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 34. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Arteriogram 
 Blood clots 
 Dehydration 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Pulmonary embolus 
 Renal 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blood Clots 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia