
 Respiratory alkalosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Respiratory alkalosis is a condition marked by a low level of carbon dioxide in the blood due to breathing excessively. Causes 
 
 Common causes include: Anxiety or panic Fever Overbreathing ( hyperventilation ) Pregnancy (this is normal) Pain Any lung disease that leads to shortness of breath can also cause respiratory alkalosis (such as pulmonary embolism and asthma). Symptoms 
 
 The symptoms may include: Dizziness Lightheadedness Numbness of the hands and feet Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Arterial  blood gas , which measures oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood Basic metabolic panel Chest x-ray Pulmonary function tests  to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at the condition that causes respiratory alkalosis. Breathing into a paper bag -- or using a mask that causes you to re-breathe carbon dioxide -- sometimes helps reduce symptoms when anxiety is the main cause of the condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook depends on the condition that is causing the respiratory alkalosis. Possible Complications 
 
 Seizures may occur if the alkalosis is extremely severe. This is very rare. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have any symptoms of lung disease, such as long-term (chronic) cough or shortness of breath. Alternative Names 
 
 Alkalosis - respiratory Images 
 
 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Effros RM, Swenson ER. Acid-base balance. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 7. Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Hyperventilation 
 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia