
 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a very common virus that leads to mild, cold-like symptoms in adults and older healthy children. It can be more serious in young babies, especially those in certain high-risk groups. Causes 
 
 RSV is the most common germ that causes lung and airway infections in infants and young children. Most infants have had this infection by age 2. Outbreaks of RSV infections most often begin in the fall and run into the spring. The infection can occur in people of all ages. The virus spreads through tiny droplets that go into the air when a sick person blows their nose, coughs, or sneezes. You can catch RSV if: A person with RSV sneezes, coughs, or blows their nose near you. You touch, kiss, or shake hands with someone who is infected by the virus. You touch your nose, eyes, or mouth after you have touched something contaminated by the virus, such as a toy or doorknob.  RSV often spreads quickly in crowded households and day care centers. The virus can live for a half an hour or more on hands. The virus can also live for up to 5 hours on countertops and for several hours on used tissues. The following increase the risk for RSV: 
  Attending day care
   
  Being near tobacco smoke
   
  
  Having school-aged brothers or sisters
  
   
  Living in crowded conditions
   Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms can vary and differ with age: They usually appear 4 to 6 days after coming in contact with the virus. Older children most often have only mild, cold-like symptoms, such as croupy cough (often described as a "seal bark"  cough ),  stuffy nose , or low-grade  fever .  Infants under age 1 may have more severe symptoms and often have the most trouble breathing: Bluish skin color due to a lack of oxygen ( cyanosis ) in more severe cases Breathing difficulty  or labored breathing Nasal flaring Rapid breathing  (tachypnea) Shortness of breath Wheezing Exams and Tests 
 
 Many hospitals and clinics can rapidly test for RSV using a sample of fluid taken from the nose with a cotton swab. Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics do not treat RSV. Mild infections go away without treatment. Infants and children with a severe RSV infection may be admitted to the hospital. Treatment will include: Oxygen Moist (humidified) air Suctioning of nasal secretions Fluids through a vein (by IV)  A breathing machine (ventilator) may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 More severe RSV disease may occur in the following infants: Premature infants Infants with chronic lung disease Infants whose immune system does not work well Infants with certain forms of heart disease  Rarely, RSV infection can cause death in infants. However, this is unlikely if the child is seen by a health care provider in the early stages of the disease. Children who have had RSV bronchiolitis may be more likely to develop asthma. Possible Complications 
 
 In young children, RSV can cause: Bronchiolitis Lung failure Pneumonia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if breathing difficulties or other symptoms of this disorder appear. Any breathing problems in an infant are an emergency. Seek medical help right away.  Prevention 
 
 To help prevent RSV infection, wash your hands often, especially before touching your baby. Make certain that other people, especially caregivers, take steps to avoid giving RSV to your baby. The following simple steps can help protect your baby from getting sick: Insist that others wash their hands with warm water and soap before touching your baby. Have others avoid contact with the baby if they have a cold or fever. If necessary, have them wear a mask. Be aware that kissing the baby can spread RSV infection. Try to keep young children away from your baby. RSV is very common among young children and easily spreads from child to child. Do not smoke inside your house, car, or anywhere near your baby. Exposure to tobacco smoke increases the risk of RSV illness.  Parents of high-risk young infants should avoid crowds during outbreaks of RSV. Moderate-to-large outbreaks are often reported by local news sources to provide parents with an opportunity to avoid exposure. The drug Synagis (palivizumab) is approved for the prevention of RSV disease in children younger than 24 months who are at high risk for serious RSV disease. Ask your doctor if your child should receive this medicine. Alternative Names 
 
 RSV; Palivizumab; Respiratory syncytial virus immune globulin; Bronchiolitis - RSV
 Images 
 
 
 Bronchiolitis 
 References 
 
 Crowe JE. Respiratory syncytial virus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 260. Walsh EE. Respiratory syncytial virus. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 362. 
  Walsh EE, Hall CB. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 160. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Antibody 
 Bronchiolitis 
 Croup 
 Otitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bronchiolitis - discharge 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia