
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy refers to a set of changes in how the heart muscle functions. These changes cause the heart to fill poorly (more common) or squeeze poorly (less common). Sometimes, both problems are present.  Causes 
 
 In a case of restrictive cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle is of normal size or slightly enlarged. Most of the time, it also pumps normally. However, it does not relax normally during the time between heartbeats when the blood returns from the body (diastole). Although the main problem is abnormal filling of the heart, the heart may not pump blood strongly when the disease progresses. The abnormal heart function can affect the lungs, liver, and other body systems. Restrictive cardiomyopathy may affect either or both of the lower heart chambers (ventricles). Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare condition. The most common causes are  amyloidosis  and scarring of the heart from an unknown cause. It also can occur after a heart transplant. Other causes of restrictive cardiomyopathy include: Carcinoid heart disease Diseases of the heart lining (endocardium), such as endomyocardial fibrosis and Loeffler syndrome (rare) Iron overload (hemochromatosis) Sarcoidosis Scarring after radiation or chemotherapy Scleroderma Tumors of the heart  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of  heart failure  are most common. These symptoms often develop slowly over time. However, symptoms sometimes start very suddenly and are severe. Common symptoms are: Cough Breathing problems that occur at night, with activity or when lying flat  
  Fatigue and inability to exercise Loss of appetite 
  Swelling of the abdomen
   
  Swelling of the feet and ankles Uneven or rapid pulse  Other symptoms may include: Chest pain Inability to concentrate Low urine output Need to urinate at night (in adults)  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show: 
 Enlarged (distended) or bulging neck veins
  
 Enlarged liver
  
 Lung crackles and abnormal or distant  heart sounds  in the chest heard through a stethoscope
  
 Fluid backup into the hands and feet
  
 Signs of  heart failure Tests for restrictive cardiomyopathy include: Cardiac catheterization  and  coronary angiography Chest CT scan Chest x-ray ECG  (electrocardiogram) Echocardiogram  and Doppler study MRI of the heart Nuclear heart scan (MUGA, RNV) Serum iron studies Serum or  urine protein  tests  Restrictive cardiomyopathy may appear similar to  constrictive pericarditis . Cardiac catheterization may help confirm the diagnosis. Rarely, a  biopsy of the heart  may be required. Treatment 
 
 The condition causing the cardiomyopathy is treated when it can be found.  Few treatments are known to work well for restrictive cardiomyopathy. The main goal of treatment is to control symptoms and improve quality of life. The following treatments may be used to control symptoms or prevent problems: Blood thinning medicines  Chemotherapy (in some situations) Diuretics to remove fluid and help improve breathing Medicines to prevent or control abnormal heart rhythms Steroids or chemotherapy for some causes A  heart transplant  may be considered if the heart function is very poor and symptoms are severe.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People with this condition often develop heart failure that gets worse. Problems with heart rhythm or "leaky" heart valves may also occur. People with restrictive cardiomyopathy may be heart transplant candidates. The outlook depends on the cause of the condition, but it is usually poor. Survival after diagnosis may exceed 10 years. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of restrictive cardiomyopathy. Alternative Names 
 
 Cardiomyopathy - restrictive; Infiltrative cardiomyopathy; Idiopathic myocardial fibrosis Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 References 
 
 Hare JM. The dilated, restrictive, and infiltrative cardiomyopathies. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 65. McKenna W, Elliott P. Diseases of the myocardium and endocardium. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 60. Read More 
 
 Muscle cramps 
 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia