
 Retrograde cystography 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Retrograde cystography is a detailed  x-ray  of the bladder. Contrast dye is placed into the bladder through the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will lie on a table. A numbing medicine is applied to the opening to your urethra. A flexible tube (catheter) is inserted through your urethra into the bladder. Contrast dye flows through the tube until your bladder is full or you tell the technician that your bladder feels full. When the bladder is full, you are placed in different positions so that x-rays can be taken. A final x-ray is taken once the catheter is removed and you have emptied your bladder. This reveals how well your bladder empties. The test takes about 30 to 60 minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You must sign an informed consent form. You must empty your bladder before the test. You will be asked questions to determine if you may have an  allergic reaction  to the contrast dye, or if you have a current infection that could make inserting the catheter difficult. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel some pressure when the catheter is inserted. You will feel an urge to urinate when the contrast dye enters the bladder. The person performing the test will stop the flow when the pressure becomes uncomfortable. The urge to urinate will continue throughout the test. After the test, the area where the catheter was placed may feel sore when you urinate.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 You may need this test to examine your bladder for problems such as holes or tears, or to find out why you have repeated bladder infections. It is also used to look for problems such as:  Abnormal connections between bladder tissue and a nearby structure (bladder fistulae) Bladder stones Pouch-like sacs called  diverticula  on the walls of the bladder or urethra Tumor of the bladder Urinary tract infection Vesicoureteric reflux Normal Results 
 
 The bladder appears normal.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Bladder stones Blood clots Diverticula Infection or inflammation Lesions Vesicoureteric reflux  Risks 
 
 There is some risk of infection from the catheter. Symptoms may include: Burning during urination (after the first day) Chills Decreased blood pressure (hypotension) Fever Increased  heart rate Increased breathing rate  The amount of radiation exposure is similar to that of other x-rays. As with any radiation exposure, nursing or pregnant women should only have this test if it is determined that the benefits outweigh the risks. Considerations 
 
 In males, testicles are shielded from the x-rays. This test is not performed very often. It is most often done along with CT scan imaging for better resolution.  Voiding cystourethrogram  (VCUG) or  cystoscopy  is used more often. Alternative Names 
 
 Cystography - retrograde; Cystogram Images 
 
 
 Vesicoureteral reflux 
 Cystography 
 References 
 
 Fulgham PF, Bishoff JT. Urinary tract imaging: Basic principles. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 4. Read More 
 
 Bladder stones 
 Blood clots 
 Diverticulitis 
 Reflux nephropathy 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia