
 Rheumatoid lung disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rheumatoid lung disease is a group of lung problems related to  rheumatoid arthritis . The condition can include: Blockage of the small airways (bronchiolitis obliterans) Fluid in the chest ( pleural effusions ) High blood pressure in the lungs ( pulmonary hypertension ) Lumps in the lungs (nodules) Scarring ( pulmonary fibrosis ) Causes 
 
 Lung problems are common in rheumatoid arthritis. They often cause no symptoms. The cause of lung disease associated with rheumatoid arthritis is unknown. Sometimes, the medicines used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, especially methotrexate, may result in lung disease. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Chest pain Cough Fever Shortness of breath Joint pain Joint stiffness Joint swelling Skin nodules Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor may hear crackles (rales) when listening to the lungs with a stethoscope. Or, there may be decreased breath sounds, wheezing, a rubbing sound, or normal breath sounds. The following tests may show signs of rheumatoid lung disease: Chest x-ray CT scan of the chest Echocardiogram  (may show pulmonary hypertension) Lung biopsy (bronchoscopic, video-assisted, or  open ) Lung function tests Needle inserted into the fluid around the lung ( thoracentesis ) Blood tests for rheumatoid arthritis Treatment 
 
 Many people with this condition have no symptoms. Treatment is aimed at the health problems causing the lung problem and the complications caused by the disorder. Corticosteroids or other medicines that suppress the immune system are sometimes useful. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outcome is related to the underlying disorder and the type and severity of lung disease. In severe cases, lung transplantation can be considered. Possible Complications 
 
 Rheumatoid lung disease may lead to: Pneumothorax Pulmonary hypertension When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you have rheumatoid arthritis and you develop unexplained breathing difficulties. Alternative Names 
 
 Lung disease - rheumatoid arthritis; Rheumatoid nodules; Rheumatoid lung Images 
 
 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Corte TJ, duBois RM, Wells AU. Connective tissue diseases. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 65. Lake F, Proudman S. Rheumatoid arthritis and lung disease: from mechanisms to a practical approach.  Semin Respir Crit Care Med . 2014;35:222-238. PMID: 24668537  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24668537 .  Read More 
 
 Collapsed lung (pneumothorax) 
 Interstitial lung disease 
 Pleural effusion 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Interstitial lung disease - adults - discharge 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lung Diseases 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia