
 Rhinophyma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rhinophyma is a large, red-colored (ruddy) nose. The nose has a bulb shape. Causes 
 
 Rhinophyma was once thought to be caused by heavy alcohol use. This is not correct. Rhinophyma occurs equally in people who DO NOT use alcohol and in those who drink heavily. The problem is much more common in men than in women. The cause of rhinophyma is unknown. It may be a severe form of a skin disease called  rosacea . It is an uncommon disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include changes in the nose, such as: Bulb-like (bulbous) shape Many oil glands Reddish color (possible) Thickening of the skin Waxy, yellow surface  Exams and Tests 
 
 Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose rhinophyma without any tests. Sometimes a skin biopsy may be needed. Treatment 
 
 The most common treatment is surgery to reshape the nose. Surgery may be done with a  laser , scalpel, or rotating brush ( dermabrasion ). Certain acne medicines may also be helpful in treating the condition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Rhinophyma can be corrected with surgery. The condition may return. Possible Complications 
 
 Rhinophyma can cause emotional distress. This is because of the way it looks. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of rhinophyma and would like to talk about treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Bulbous nose; Nose - bulbous; Phymatous rosacea Images 
 
 
 Rosacea 
 References 
 
 Berth-Jones J. Rhinophyma. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 211. Habif TP. Acne, rosacea, and related disorders. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 7. 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Rosacea 
 Browse the Encyclopedia