
 Rhubarb leaves poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rhubarb leaves poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of leaves from the rhubarb plant. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Poisonous ingredients include: Anthraquinone glycosides (possible) Oxalic acid  Where Found 
 
 These substances are found in the leaves (leaf blade) of the rhubarb plant. The stalk can be eaten. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Breathing difficulty Burning in the mouth Burning in the throat Coma Diarrhea Eye pain Kidney stones Nausea and vomiting Red-colored urine Seizures Stomach pain Weakness  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider. Flush the skin and eyes with lots of water, if the plant touched these areas. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the plant, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The provider will measure and monitor person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Breathing support Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids by IV (through the vein) Laxatives Medicines to treat symptoms  Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay.  Serious poisonings can result in kidney failure. Deaths have been reported, but are rare. DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods. Alternative Names 
 
 Rheum officinale poisoning References 
 
 Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 64. Stegelmeier BL, Field R, Panter KE, et al. Selected poisonous plants affecting animal and human health. In: Haschek WAM, Rousseaux CG, Wallig MA, eds.  Haschek and Rousseaux's Handbook of Toxicologic Pathology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 40. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia