
 Ringworm of the body 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ringworm is a skin infection that is caused by fungi. It is also called tinea. Related skin fungus infections may appear: On the  scalp In a man's beard In the groin ( jock itch ) Between the toes ( athlete's foot ) Causes 
 
 Fungi are germs that can live on the dead tissue of the hair, nails, and outer skin layers.  Ringworm  of the body is caused by mold-like fungi called dermatophytes. Ringworm of the body is common in children, but can occur in people of all ages. Fungi thrive in warm, moist areas. A ringworm infection is more likely if you: Have wet skin for a long time (such as from sweating) Have minor skin and nail injuries DO NOT bathe or wash your hair often Have close contact with other people (such as in sports like wrestling) Ringworm can spread easily. You can catch it if you come into direct contact with an area of ringworm on someone's body. You can also get it by touching items that have the fungi on them, such as: Clothing Combs Pool surfaces Shower floors and walls Ringworm can also be spread by pets. (Cats are common carriers.) Symptoms 
 
 The rash begins as a small area of red, raised spots and pimples. The rash slowly becomes ring-shaped, with a red, raised border and a clearer center. The border may look scaly. The rash may occur on the arms, legs, face, or other exposed body areas.  The area may be  itchy . Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can often diagnose ringworm by looking at your skin. You may also need the following tests: Examination of a skin scraping from the rash under a microscope using a  special test Skin culture  for fungus Skin biopsy Treatment 
 
 Keep your skin clean and dry. Use creams that treat fungal infections. Creams that contain miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, terbinafine, or oxiconazole, or other antifungal medicines are often effective in controlling ringworm. You can buy some of these creams over-the-counter, or your provider may give you a prescription. To use this medicine: Wash and dry the area first. Apply the cream, beginning just outside the area of the rash and moving toward the center. Be sure to wash and dry your hands afterward. Use the cream twice a day for 7 to 10 days. DO NOT use a bandage over ringworm. Your provider may prescribe medicine to take by mouth if your infection is very bad. A child with ringworm can return to school once treatment has started. To prevent the infection from spreading: Wash clothing, towels, and bedding in hot, soapy water and then dry them using hottest heat as recommended on the care label. Use a new towel and washcloth every time you wash. Clean sinks, bathtubs, and bathroom floors well after each use. Wear clean clothes every day and DO NOT share clothes. If you play contact sports, shower right away afterward.  Infected pets should also be treated. This is because ringworm can spread from animals to humans by contact. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Ringworm often goes away within 4 weeks when using antifungal creams. The infection may spread to the feet, scalp, groin, or nails. 
 Possible Complications 
 
 Two complications of ringworm are: Skin infection from scratching too much  Other skin disorders that require further treatment When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if ringworm does not get better with self-care. Alternative Names 
 
 Tinea corporis; Fungal infection - body; Tinea circinata; Ringworm - body Images 
 
 
 Dermatitis, reaction to tinea 
 Ringworm, tinea corporis on an infant's leg 
 Tinea versicolor - close-up 
 Tinea versicolor - shoulders 
 Ringworm, tinea on the hand and leg 
 Tinea versicolor - close-up 
 Tinea versicolor on the back 
 Ringworm, tinea manuum on the finger 
 Ringworm, tinea corporis on the leg 
 Granuloma, fungal (Majocchi's) 
 Granuloma, fungal (Majocchi's) 
 Tinea corporis - ear 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Superficial fungal infections. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 13. Hay RJ. Dermatophytosis (ringworm) and other superficial mycoses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 268. Read More 
 
 Athlete's foot 
 Cellulitis 
 Jock itch 
 Ringworm 
 Ringworm of the scalp 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tinea Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia