
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a disease caused by a type of bacteria carried by ticks. Causes 
 
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by the bacteria  Rickettsia rickettsii (R. Rickettsii) , which is carried by ticks. The bacteria spread to humans through a  tick  bite. In the western United States, the bacteria are carried by the wood tick, and in the eastern U.S. they are carried by the dog tick. Other ticks spread the infection in the southern U.S. and in Central and South America. Contrary to the name "Rocky Mountain," most recent cases have been reported in the eastern United States, including North and South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Georgia, Tennessee, and Oklahoma. Most cases occur in the spring and summer and are found in children. Risk factors include recent hiking or exposure to ticks in an area where the disease is known to occur. The bacteria are unlikely to be transmitted to a person by a tick that has been attached for less than 20 hours. Only about 1 in 1,000 wood and dog ticks carry the bacteria. Bacteria can also infect people who crush ticks they have removed from pets with their bare fingers. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually develop about 2 to 14 days after the tick bite. They may include: Chills and fever Confusion Headache Muscle pain Rash -- usually starts a few days after the fever; first appears on wrists and ankles as spots that are 1 to 5 mm in diameter, then spreads to most of the body. About one-third of infected people do not get a rash.  Other symptoms that may occur with this disease: Diarrhea Light sensitivity Hallucinations Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Thirst Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about the symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Antibody titer  by  complement  fixation or immunofluorescence Complete blood count  (CBC) Kidney function tests Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) Prothrombin time (PT) Skin biopsy taken from the rash to check for  R. rickettsii Urinalysis to check for  blood  or  protein in the urine Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves carefully removing the tick from the skin. To get rid of the infection, antibiotics such as doxycycline or tetracycline need to be taken. Pregnant women are usually prescribed chloramphenicol. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treatment usually cures the infection. About 3% of people who get this disease will die. Possible Complications 
 
 Untreated, the infection may lead to health problems such as: Brain damage Clotting problems Heart failure Kidney failure Lung failure Meningitis Pneumonitis (lung inflammation) Shock  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms after exposure to ticks or a tick bite. The complications of untreated Rocky Mountain spotted fever are often life-threatening. Prevention 
 
 When walking or hiking in tick-infested areas, tuck long pants into socks to protect the legs. Wear shoes and long-sleeved shirts. Ticks will show up on white or light colors better than on dark colors, making them easier to see and remove. Remove ticks immediately by using tweezers, pulling carefully and steadily. Insect repellent may be helpful. Because far fewer than 1% of ticks carry this infection, antibiotics are not usually given after a tick bite. Alternative Names 
 
 Spotted fever Images 
 
 
 Rocky mountain spotted fever, lesions on arm 
 Deer ticks 
 Ticks 
 Rocky mountain spotted fever on the arm 
 Tick imbedded in the skin 
 Rocky mountain spotted fever on the foot 
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever, petechial rash 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 McElligott SC, Kihiczak GG, Schwartz RA. Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other rickettsial infections. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA:Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 212. Walker DH, Blaton LS.  Rickettsia rickettsii  and other spotted fever group rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fevers). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 188. Read More 
 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Meningitis 
 Respiratory 
 Tick bite 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia