
 Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a genetic disease. It involves broad thumbs and toes, short stature, distinctive facial features, and varying degrees of intellectual disability. Causes 
 
 RTS is a rare condition. Defects in the genes  CREBBP  and  EP300  are seen in some people with this condition. Some people are missing the gene entirely. This is more typical in people with more severe problems. Most cases are sporadic (not passed down through families). They are likely due to a new genetic defect that occurs either in the sperm or egg cells, or at the time of conception. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Broadening of the thumbs and big toes Constipation Excess hair on body (hirsutism) Heart defects, possibly requiring surgery Intellectual disability Seizures Short stature  that is noticeable after birth Slow development of cognitive skills Slow development of motor skills accompanied by low muscle tone  Other signs and symptoms may include: Absent or extra kidney, and other problems with kidney or bladder An underdeveloped bone in the midface Unsteady or stiff walking gait Downward-slanted eyes Low-set ears  or malformed ears Drooping eyelid ( ptosis ) Cataracts Coloboma  (a defect in the iris of the eye) Extra fingers (polydactyly) Macrocephaly  (excessively large head) or  microcephaly  (excessively small head) Narrow, small, or recessed mouth with crowded teeth Prominent or "beaked" nose Thick and arched eyebrows with long eyelashes Undescended testicle ( cryptorchidism ), or other testicular problems  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Blood tests and x-rays may also be done. Genetic tests can be done to determine if the genes involved in this disease are missing or changed. Treatment 
 
 There is no specific treatment for RTS. Surgery to repair the bones in the thumbs or toes can sometimes improve grasp or relieve discomfort. Support Groups 
 
 Rubinstein-Taybi Parents Group USA:  www.rubinstein-taybi.com Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The majority of children can learn to read at an elementary level. The majority have delayed motor development, but on average, they learn to walk by 2 1/2 years of age. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on what part of the body is affected. Complications may include: Feeding problems in infants Repeated ear infections and hearing loss Problems with the shape of the heart Abnormal heartbeat Scarring of the skin  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 An appointment with a geneticist is recommended if the provider finds signs of RTS. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is advised for couples with a family history of this disease who are planning a pregnancy. Alternative Names 
 
 Rubinstein syndrome, RTS Images 
 
 
 Polydactyly - an infant's hand 
 References 
 
 Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF. Develomental genetics and birth defects. In: Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds.  Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14. Stevens CA. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.  Gene Reviews.  2014;8. PMID: 20301699  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301699 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Read More 
 
 Low-set ears and pinna abnormalities 
 Palpebral slant - eye 
 Short stature 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Developmental Disabilities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia