
 Sachet poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sachet is a bag of perfumed powder or a mix of dried flowers, herbs, spices, and aromatic wood shavings (potpourri). Some sachets also contain aromatic oils. Sachet poisoning occurs when someone swallows the ingredients of a sachet. This can be by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Potpourri is generally considered to be nontoxic. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of sachet poisoning include: Eye irritation  Diarrhea Difficulty swallowing Nausea  and vomiting Rapid breathing  Shallow breathing Stomach pain Throat irritation  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the sachet with you to the hospital, if possible.  The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Activated charcoal Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (by IV) Laxatives Medicine to treat symptoms Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much of the sachet contents they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Sachets are not considered very poisonous. Alternative Names 
 
 Potpourri poisoning References 
 
 Caraccio TR, McFee RB. Cosmetics and toilet articles. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 100. Maypole J, Woolf, AD. Essential oils. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 101. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/16/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia