
 Safe sex  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Safe sex means taking steps before and during sex that can prevent you from getting an infection, or from giving an infection to your partner. Information 
 
 A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is an infection that can be spread to another person through sexual contact. STIs include: Chlamydia Genital herpes Genital warts Gonorrhea Hepatitis HIV HPV Syphilis  STIs are also called sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). These infections are spread by direct contact with a sore on the genitals or mouth, body fluids, or sometimes the skin around the genital area. Before having sex: Get to know your partner and discuss your sexual histories. Don't feel forced into having sex. Don't have sexual contact with anyone but your partner. Your sexual partner should be someone who you know does not have any STI. Before having sex with a new partner, each of you should get screened for STIs and share the test results with each other. If you know you have an STI such as HIV or herpes, let any sexual partner know this before you have sex. Allow him or her to decide what to do. If you both agree to have sexual contact, use latex or polyurethane condoms. Use  condoms  for all vaginal, anal, and oral intercourse. The condom should be in place from the beginning to the end of the sexual activity. Use it every time you have sex. Keep in mind that STIs can be spread by contact with skin areas around the genitals. A condom reduces but does not eliminate your risk of getting an STI.  Other tips include:  Use lubricants. They may help reduce the chance that a condom will break. Use only water-based lubricants. Oil-based or petroleum-type lubricants can cause latex to weaken and tear. Polyurethane condoms are less likely to break than latex condoms, but they cost more. Using condoms with nonoxynol-9 (a spermicide) may increase the chance of HIV transmission. Stay sober. Alcohol and drugs impair your judgment. When you are not sober, you might not choose your partner as carefully. You may also forget to use condoms, or use them incorrectly.  Get tested regularly for STIs if you have new sexual partners. Most STIs have no symptoms, so you need to be tested often if there is any chance you have been exposed. You will have the best outcome and will be less likely to spread the infection if you are diagnosed early. Consider getting the  HPV vaccine  to keep from getting the human papillomavirus. This virus can put you at risk for genital warts and for cervical cancer in women.  Alternative Names 
 
 Chlamydia - safe sex; STD - safe sex; STI - safe sex; Sexually transmitted - safe sex; GC - safe sex; Gonorrhea - safe sex; Herpes - safe sex; HIV - safe sex; Condoms - safe sex Images 
 
 
 The female condom 
 The male condom 
 STDs and ecological niches 
 Primary syphilis 
 References 
 
 Gardella C, Eckert LO, Lentz GM. Genital tract infections: vulva, vagina, cervix, toxic shock syndrome, endometritis, and salpingitis. In: Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, eds.  Comprehensive Gynecology . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 23. LeFevre ML, on behalf of the US Preventive Services Task Force. Behavioral counseling to prevent sexually transmitted infections: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2014;161(12):894-901. doi:10.7326/M14-1965.  annals.org/article.aspx?articleid=1906847 . Scott GR. Sexually transmitted infections. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Penman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 15. Workowski KA, Bolan GA; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.  MMWR Recomm Rep . 2015;64(RR-3):1-140. PMID: 26042815.  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26042815 . 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia