
 Salivary gland infections 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Salivary gland infections affect the glands that produce spit (saliva). The infection may be due to bacteria or viruses. There are 3 pairs of major salivary glands:  Parotid glands: These are the 2 largest glands. One is located in each cheek over the jaw in front of the ears. Inflammation of 1 or more of these glands is called parotitis, or parotiditis.  Submandibular glands: These 2 glands are located just under both sides of the lower jaw and carry saliva up to the floor of the mouth under the tongue.  Sublingual glands: These 2 glands are located just under the front most area of the floor of the mouth. All of the salivary glands empty saliva into the mouth. The saliva enters the mouth through ducts that open into the mouth in different places.  Causes 
 
 Salivary gland infections are somewhat common, and they can return in some people.  Viral infections such as  mumps  often affect the salivary glands. (Mumps most often involves the parotid salivary gland). Mumps is a rare problem today because of the MMR vaccine.  Bacterial infections are most often the result of a:  Blockage from  salivary duct stones Poor cleanliness in the mouth ( oral hygiene ) Low amounts of water in the body, most often while in the hospital Smoking Chronic illness Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Abnormal tastes , foul tastes Decreased ability to open the mouth Dry mouth Fever Mouth or  facial "squeezing" pain , especially when eating Redness over the side of the face or the upper neck Swelling of the face  (particularly in front of the ears, below the jaw, or on the floor of the mouth) Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider or dentist will do an exam to look for enlarged glands. You may also have pus that drains into the mouth. The gland is most often painful.  A CT scan, MRI scan or ultrasound may be done if the doctor suspects an  abscess  or to look for stones.  Treatment 
 
 In some cases, no treatment is needed.  Treatment from your provider may include: Antibiotics if you have a fever or pus drainage, or if the infection is caused by bacteria. Antibiotics are not useful against viral infections.  Surgery or  aspiration  to drain an abscess if you have one.  Self-care steps you can take at home to help with recovery include: Practice good oral hygiene. Brush your teeth and floss well at least twice a day. This may help with healing and prevent an infection from spreading. Rinse your mouth with warm salt water rinses (one half teaspoon or 3 grams of salt in 1 cup or 240 milliliters of water) to ease pain and keep the mouth moist.  Stop smoking if you are a smoker, to speed up healing.  Drink lots of water and use sugar-free lemon drops to increase the flow of saliva and reduce swelling.  Massaging the gland with heat. Using warm compresses on the inflamed gland. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most salivary gland infections go away on their own or are cured with treatment. Some infections will return. Complications are not common. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Abscess of salivary gland Infection returns Spread of infection ( cellulitis ,  Ludwig's angina )  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of a salivary gland infection. You've been diagnosed with a salivary gland infection and symptoms get worse. Get medical help right away if you have a high fever, trouble breathing, or swallowing problems. Prevention 
 
 In many cases, salivary gland infections cannot be prevented. Good oral hygiene may prevent some cases of bacterial infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Parotitis; Sialadenitis Images 
 
 
 Head and neck glands 
 References 
 
 Elluru RG. Physiology of the salivary glands. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 83. Jackson NM, Mitchell JL, Walvekar RR. Inflammatory disorders of the salivary glands. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Cellulitis 
 Dental care - adult 
 Ludwig’s angina 
 Mumps 
 Salivary duct stones 
 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Salivary Gland Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia