
 Scabies 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Scabies is an easily-spread skin disease caused by a very small mite. Causes 
 
 Scabies is found among people of all groups and ages around the world.  Scabies spread by skin-to-skin contact with another person who has scabies. Scabies is easily spread among people who are in close contact. Whole families are often affected. Outbreaks of scabies are more common in nursing homes, nursing facilities, college dorms, and child care centers. The mites that cause scabies burrow into the skin and lay their eggs. This forms a burrow that looks like a pencil mark. Eggs hatch in 21 days. The itchy rash is an  allergic response  to the mite. Pets and animals usually do not spread human scabies. It is also not very likely for scabies to be spread through swimming pools. A type of scabies called crusted (Norwegian) scabies is a severe infestation with very large numbers of mites. People whose immune systems are weakened are most affected. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of scabies include: Severe  itching , most often at night. Rashes , mostly between the fingers and toes, undersides of the wrists, arm pits, women's breasts, buttocks. Sores on the skin from scratching and digging. Thin lines (burrow marks) on the skin. Babies will likely have a rash all over the body, especially on the head, face, and neck, with sores on the palms and soles. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the skin for signs of scabies.  Tests that may done include: Scraping the skin burrows to remove mites, eggs, or mite feces to examine under the microscope. In some cases, a  skin biopsy  is done. Treatment 
 
 HOME CARE Before treatment, wash clothes and underwear, towels, bedding and sleepwear in hot water and dry at 140°F (60°C) or higher. Dry cleaning also works. If washing or dry cleaning can't be done, keep these items away from the body for at least 72 hours. Away from the body, the mites will die. Vacuum carpets and upholstered furniture. Use calamine lotion and soak in a cool bath to ease itching. Take an oral antihistamine if your provider recommends it for very bad itching. MEDICINES FROM YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER The whole family or sexual partners of infected people should be treated, even if they do not have symptoms. Creams prescribed by your provider are needed to treat scabies. The cream most often used is permethrin 5%. Other creams include benzyl benzoate, sulfur in petrolatum, and crotamiton. Apply the medicine all over your body. Creams may be used as a one-time treatment or they may be repeated in 1 week. For hard to treat cases, the provider may also prescribe a pill known as ivermectin as a one-time dose. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Itching may continue for 2 weeks or more after treatment begins. It will disappear if you follow the provider's treatment plan. Most cases of scabies can be cured without any long-term problems. A severe case with a lot of scaling or crusting may be a sign that the person has a weakened immune system. Possible Complications 
 
 Intense scratching can cause a secondary skin infection, such as  impetigo . When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have symptoms of scabies. A person you have been in close contact with has been diagnosed with scabies. Alternative Names 
 
 Human scabies; Sarcoptes scabiei 
  Images 
 
 
 Scabies rash and excoriation on the hand 
 Scabies mite, photomicrograph 
 Scabies mite, photomicrograph of the stool 
 Scabies mite, photomicrograph 
 Scabies mite, photomicrograph 
 Scabies mite, eggs, and stool photomicrograph 
 References 
 
 Diaz JH. Scabies. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 295. Tucker WFG, Powell JB. Scabies. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 215. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Vesicles 
 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Scabies 
 Browse the Encyclopedia