
 Schistosomiasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Schistosomiasis is an infection with a type of Schistosoma parasite. Causes 
 
 You can get a schistosoma infection through contact with contaminated water. This parasite swims freely in open bodies of water. When the parasite comes into contact with humans, it burrows into the skin and matures into another stage. Then, it travels to the lungs and liver, where it grows into the adult form of the worm. The adult worm then travels to its preferred body part, depending on its species. These areas include the:  Bladder Rectum Intestines Liver Veins that carry blood from the intestines to the liver Spleen Lungs  Schistosomiasis is not usually seen in the United States. It is common in many tropical and subtropical areas worldwide. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms vary with the species of worm and the phase of infection. Many parasites may cause fever, chills, swollen lymph nodes, and swollen liver and spleen. When the worm first gets into the skin, it may cause itching and a rash (swimmer's itch). In this condition, the schistosome is destroyed within the skin. Intestinal symptoms include abdominal pain and diarrhea (which may be bloody). Urinary symptoms may include frequent urination, painful urination, and blood in the urine.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you. Tests that may be done include: Antibody test to check for signs of infection Biopsy of tissue Complete blood count (CBC) to check for signs of anemia Eosinophil count to measure the number of certain white blood cells Kidney function tests Liver function tests Stool examination to look for parasite eggs Urinalysis  to look for parasite eggs  Treatment 
 
 This infection is usually treated with the drug praziquantel. If the infection is severe or involves the brain, corticosteroids may be given. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Treatment before significant damage or severe complications occur usually produces good results. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur: Bladder cancer Chronic kidney failure Chronic liver damage and an enlarged spleen Colon (large intestine) inflammation Kidney and bladder blockage Pulmonary hypertension Repeated blood infections, if bacteria enter the bloodstream through an irritated colon Right-sided heart failure Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of schistosomiasis, especially if you have: Traveled to a tropical or subtropical area where the disease is known to exist Been exposed to contaminated or possibly contaminated bodies of water  Prevention 
 
 Follow these steps to avoid getting this infection: Avoid swimming or bathing in contaminated or potentially contaminated water. Avoid bodies of water if you do not know whether they are safe. Snails can host this parasite. Getting rid of snails in bodies of water used by humans may help prevent infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Bilharzia; Katayama fever; Swimmer's itch; Blood fluke Images 
 
 
 Swimmer's itch 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Carvalho EM, Lima AAM. Schistosomiasis (Bilharziasis). In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 363. Maguire JH. Trematodes (schistosomes and liver, intestinal, and lung flukes). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds.  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 290. Read More 
 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Seizures 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia