
 Schizotypal personality disorder 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) is a mental condition in which a person has trouble with relationships and disturbances in thought patterns, appearance, and behavior. Causes 
 
 Causes of SPD are unknown. Genes are thought to be involved because this condition is more common in relatives of schizophrenics. Symptoms 
 
 SPD should not be confused with  schizophrenia . People with SPD can have odd beliefs and behaviors, but unlike people with schizophrenia, they are not disconnected from reality and usually DO NOT  hallucinate . They also DO NOT have delusions. People with SPD may be very disturbed. They may also have unusual preoccupations and fears, such as fear of being monitored by government agencies. More commonly, people with this disorder behave oddly and have unusual beliefs (such as aliens). They cling to these beliefs so strongly that they have difficulty forming and keeping close relationships. People with SPD may also have depression. A second personality disorder, such as  paranoid personality disorder , is also common. Common signs of SPD include: Discomfort in social situations Inappropriate displays of feelings No close friends Odd behavior or appearance Odd beliefs, fantasies, or preoccupations Odd speech Exams and Tests 
 
 SPD is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are. Treatment 
 
 Talk therapy is an important part of treatment. Social skills training can help some people cope with social situations. Medicines may also be a helpful addition. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 SPD is usually a long-term (chronic) illness. Outcome of treatment varies based on the severity of the disorder. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Poor social skills Lack of interpersonal relationships  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your provider or a mental health professional if you or someone you know has symptoms of SPD. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Awareness of risk, such as a family history of schizophrenia, may allow early diagnosis. Alternative Names 
 
 Personality disorder - schizotypal References 
 
 American Psychiatric Association. Schizotypal personality disorder.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 . 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013;655-659. Blais MA, Smallwood P, Groves JE, Rivas-Vazquez RA. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39. Rosell DR, Futterman SE, McMaster A, Siever LJ. Schizotypal personality disorder: a current review.  Curr Psychiatry Rep . 2014;16(7):452. PMID: 24828284  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24828284 . Read More 
 
 Schizophrenia 
 
 Review Date 11/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic Psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Personality Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia