
 Scleritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The sclera is the white outer wall of the eye. Scleritis is present when this area becomes swollen or inflamed. Causes 
 
 Scleritis is often linked to  autoimmune diseases . These diseases occur when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake. Diseases such as  rheumatoid arthritis  and  systemic lupus erythematosus  can cause this problem. Sometimes the cause is unknown. Scleritis occurs most often in people between the ages of 30 and 60. It is rare in children. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of scleritis include: Blurred vision Eye pain  and tenderness -- severe Red patches on the normally white part of the eye Sensitivity to light  -- very painful Tearing of the eye A rare form of this disease causes no eye pain or redness. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform the following tests: Eye exam Physical exam and blood tests to look for conditions that may be causing the problem It is important for your provider to determine if you have scleritis. The symptoms can also be a less severe form of inflammation, such as  episcleritis . Treatment 
 
 Treatments for scleritis may include: Corticosteroid eye drops to help reduce the inflammation Corticosteroid pills Newer, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in some cases Certain anticancer drugs (immune-suppressants) for severe cases If scleritis is caused by an underlying disease, treatment of that disease may be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 In most cases, the condition goes away with treatment. But it may come back.  The disorder causing scleritis may be serious. However, it may not be discovered the first time you have the problem. The outcome will depend on the specific disorder. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Return of scleritis Side effects of long-term corticosteroid therapy Perforation of the eyeball, leading to vision loss if the condition is left untreated When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider or ophthalmologist if you have symptoms of scleritis. Prevention 
 
 Most cases cannot be prevented. People with autoimmune diseases, may need to have regular check-ups with an ophthalmologist familiar with the condition.  Alternative Names 
 
 Inflammation - sclera Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 References 
 
 Boyd K. Scleritis. American Academy of Ophthalmology Web site.  www.aao.org/eye-health/diseases/what-is-scleritis . Accessed September 1, 2016. Watson P. Diseases of the sclera and episclera. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology, 2013 Edition . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4, chap 23. Yanoff M, Cameron JD. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Diseases 
 Lupus 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia