
 Scoliosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Scoliosis is an abnormal curving of the spine. Your spine is your backbone. It runs straight down your back. Everyone's spine naturally curves a bit. But people with scoliosis have a spine that curves too much. The spine might look like the letter C or S. Causes 
 
 Most of the time, the cause of scoliosis is unknown. This is called idiopathic scoliosis. It is the most common type. It is grouped by age. In children age 3 and younger, it is called infantile scoliosis. In children age 4 through 10, it is called juvenile scoliosis. In children age 11 through 18, it is called adolescent scoliosis. Scoliosis most often affects girls. Some people are more likely to have curving of the spine. Curving generally gets worse during a growth spurt. Other types of scoliosis are: Congenital scoliosis: This type of scoliosis is present at birth. It occurs when the baby’s ribs or spine bones do not form properly. Neuromuscular scoliosis: This type is caused by a nervous system problem that affects the muscles. Problems can include  cerebral palsy ,  muscular dystrophy , spina bifida, and  polio . Symptoms 
 
 Most often, there are no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they may include: Backache or low-back pain Tired feeling in the spine after sitting or standing for a long time Uneven hips or shoulders (one shoulder may be higher than the other) Spine curves more to one side Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. You will be asked to bend forward. This makes your spine easier to see. It may be hard to see changes in the early stages of scoliosis. The exam may show: One shoulder is higher than the other The pelvis is tilted X-rays of the spine are done. X-rays are important because the actual curving of the spine may be worse than what your doctor can see during an exam. Other tests may include: Spinal curve measurement (scoliometer screening) MRI  of the spine Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on many things: The cause of scoliosis Where the curve is in your spine How big the curve is If your body is still growing Most people with idiopathic scoliosis do not need treatment. But you should still be checked by a doctor about every 6 months. If you are still growing, your doctor might recommend a back brace. A back brace prevents further curving. There are many different types of braces. What kind you get depends on the size and location of your curve. Your provider will pick the best one for you and show you how to use it. Back braces can be adjusted as you grow. Back braces work best in people over age 10. Braces do not work for those with congenital or neuromuscular scoliosis. You may need  surgery  if the spine curve is severe or getting worse very quickly. Surgery involves correcting the curve as much as possible: Surgery is done with a cut through the back, belly area, or beneath the ribs. The spine bones are held in place with 1 or 2 metal rods. The rods are held down with hooks and screws until the bone heals together. After surgery, you may need to wear a brace for a while to keep the spine still. Scoliosis treatment may also include: Emotional support: Some children, especially teens, may be self-conscious when using a back brace. Physical therapy and other specialists to help explain the treatments and make sure the brace fits correctly. Support Groups 
 
 Seek support and more information from  organizations that specialize in scoliosis . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person with scoliosis does depends on the type, cause, and severity of the curve. The more severe the curving, the more likely it will get worse after the child stops growing. People with mild scoliosis do well with braces. They usually do not have long-term problems. Back pain may be more likely when the person gets older. Outlook for those with neuromuscular or congenital scoliosis varies. They may have another serious disorder, such as cerebral palsy or muscular dystrophy, so their goals are much different. Often, the goal of surgery is simply to allow a child to be able to sit upright in a wheelchair. Congenital scoliosis is difficult to treat and usually requires many surgeries. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of scoliosis can include: Breathing problems (in severe scoliosis) Low back pain Lower self-esteem Persistent pain if there is wear and tear of the spine bones Spinal infection after surgery Spine or nerve damage from an uncorrected curve or spinal surgery When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you suspect your child may have scoliosis. Prevention 
 
 Routine scoliosis screening is now done in middle schools. Such screening has helped detect early scoliosis in many children. Alternative Names 
 
 Spinal curvature; Infantile scoliosis; Juvenile scoliosis Images 
 
 
 Scoliosis 
 Skeletal spine 
 Scoliosis 
 Spinal curves 
 Signs of scoliosis 
 Forward bend test 
 Scoliosis brace 
 Spinal fusion 
 References 
 
 Mistovich RJ, Spiegel DA. The spine. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 679. Richards BS, Sucato DJ, Johnston CE. Scoliosis. In: Herring JA, ed.  Tachdjian's Pediatric Orthopaedics . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Thomas MA, Therattil M. Scoliosis and kyphosis. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 152. Read More 
 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Fatigue 
 Lateral 
 Muscle function loss 
 Muscular dystrophy 
 Polio 
 Respiratory 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Anesthesia - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Scoliosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia