
 Seborrheic keratosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Seborrheic keratosis is a condition that causes wart-like growths on the skin. The growths are noncancerous ( benign ).  Causes 
 
 Seborrheic keratosis is a benign form of skin  tumor . The cause is unknown. The condition commonly appears after age 40. It tends to run in families. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of seborrheic keratosis are skin growths that: Are located on the face, chest, shoulders, back, or other areas Are painless, but may become irritated and  itch Are most often tan, brown, or black Have a slightly raised, flat surface May have a rough texture (like a wart) Often have a waxy surface Are round or oval in shape May look like a piece of bee's wax that has been "pasted-on" the skin Often appear in clusters  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will look at the growths to determine if you have the condition. You may need a  skin biopsy  to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment 
 
 You usually DO NOT need treatment unless growths get irritated or affect your appearance. Growths may be removed with  surgery  or freezing ( cryotherapy ). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Removing the growths is simple and usually does not cause scars. You may have patches of lighter skin where growths on the torso have been removed. Growths usually DO NOT return after they are removed. You may develop more growths in the future if you are prone to the condition. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications may occur: Irritation, bleeding, or discomfort of growths Mistake in diagnosis (growths may look like  skin cancer  tumors) Distress due to physical appearance When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of seborrheic keratosis. Also call if you have new symptoms, such as: A change in the appearance of the skin growth New growths A growth that looks like a seborrheic keratosis, but occurs by itself or has ragged borders and irregular color. (Your provider will need to examine it for skin cancer.) Alternative Names 
 
 Benign skin tumors - keratosis; Keratosis - seborrheic; Senile keratosis Images 
 
 
 Irritated Seborrheic Kerotosis - neck 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Benign skin tumors. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 20. Motley RJ. Seborrheic kertosis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 220. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Itching 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia