
 Selective deficiency of IgA 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Selective deficiency of IgA is the most common  immune deficiency disorder . People with this disorder have a low or absent level of a blood protein called immunoglobulin A. Causes 
 
 IgA deficiency is usually inherited, which means it is passed down through families. However, cases of drug-induced IgA deficiency have been reported. It may be inherited as an  autosomal dominant  or  autosomal recessive  trait. It is usually found in people of European origin. It is less common in people of other ethnicities. Symptoms 
 
 Many people with selective IgA deficiency have no symptoms. If a person does have symptoms, they may include frequent episodes of: Bronchitis  (airway infection) Chronic diarrhea Conjunctivitis  (eye infection) Gastrointestinal inflammation, including ( ulcerative colitis ,  Crohn disease , and a  sprue-like illness Mouth infection Otitis media  (middle ear infection) Pneumonia  (lung infection) Sinusitis  (sinus infection) Skin infections Upper respiratory tract infections  Other symptoms include: Bronchiectasis  (a disease in which the small air sacs in the lungs become damaged and enlarged) Asthma  without a known cause Exams and Tests 
 
 There may be a family history of IgA deficiency. Tests that may be done include: 
   IgG subclass measurements
    Quantitative immunoglobulins Serum immunoelectrophoresis Treatment 
 
 No specific treatment is available. Some people gradually develop normal levels of IgA without treatment. Treatment involves taking steps to reduce the number and severity of infections. Antibiotics are often needed to treat bacterial infections. Immunoglobulins are given through a vein or by injection to boost the immune system. Autoimmune disease treatment is based on the specific problem. Note: People with complete IgA deficiency may develop anti-IgA antibodies if given blood products and immunoglobulins. This may lead to  allergies  or life-threatening  anaphylactic shock . However, they can safely be given IgA-depleted immunoglobulins. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Selective IgA deficiency is less harmful than many other immunodeficiency diseases. Some people with IgA deficiency will recover on their own and produce IgA in larger quantities over a period of years. Possible Complications 
 
 Autoimmune disorders such as  rheumatoid arthritis ,  systemic lupus erythematosus , and  celiac sprue  may develop. People with IgA deficiency may develop antibodies to IgA. As a result, they can have severe, even life-threatening reactions to transfusions of blood and blood products. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you have an IgA deficiency, be sure to mention it to your health care provider if immunoglobulin or other blood-component transfusions are suggested as a treatment for any condition. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling may be of value to prospective parents with a family history of selective IgA deficiency. Alternative Names 
 
 IgA deficiency; Immunodepressed - IgA deficiency; Immunosuppressed - IgA deficiency; Hypogammaglobulinemia - IgA deficiency; Agammaglobulinemia - IgA deficiency Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Buckley RH. Primary defects of antibody production. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 124. Cunningham-Rundles C. Primary immunodeficiency diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 250. Read More 
 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Respiratory 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 3/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Stuart I. Henochowicz, MD, FACP, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Immune System and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia