
 Sepsis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sepsis is an illness in which the body has a severe, inflammatory response to bacteria or other germs. Causes 
 
 The symptoms of sepsis are not caused by the germs themselves. Instead, chemicals the body releases cause the response. A bacterial infection anywhere in the body may set off the response that leads to sepsis. Common places where an infection might start include the: Bloodstream Bones (common in children) Bowel (usually seen with  peritonitis ) Kidneys (upper  urinary tract infection , pyelonephritis or urosepsis) Lining of the brain ( meningitis ) Liver or gallbladder Lungs ( bacterial pneumonia ) Skin ( cellulitis ) For people in the hospital, common sites of infection include  intravenous  lines, surgical wounds, surgical drains, and sites of skin breakdown, known as bedsores or  pressure ulcers . Sepsis commonly affects infants or older adults.  Symptoms 
 
 In sepsis, blood pressure drops, resulting in  shock . Major organs and body systems, including the kidneys, liver, lungs, and central nervous system may stop working properly because of poor blood flow. A  change in mental status  and very fast breathing may be the earliest signs of sepsis. In general, symptoms of sepsis can include: Chills Confusion  or  delirium Fever  or low body temperature ( hypothermia ) Lightheadedness due to low blood pressure Rapid heartbeat Skin rash  or  mottled skin Warm skin  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the person and ask about the person's medical history. The infection is often confirmed by a blood test. But a blood test may not reveal infection in people who have been receiving antibiotics. Some infections that can cause sepsis cannot be diagnosed by a blood test. Other tests that may be done include: Blood differential Blood gases Kidney function tests Platelet count and  fibrin degradation products , to check for bleeding risk White blood cell count Treatment 
 
 A person with sepsis will be admitted to a hospital, usually in the intensive care unit (ICU). Antibiotics are usually given through a vein (intravenously). Other medical treatments include: Oxygen to help with breathing Fluids given through a vein Medicines that increase blood pressure Dialysis  if there is kidney failure A breathing machine ( mechanical ventilation ) if there is lung failure Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Sepsis is often life threatening, especially in people with a weak immune system or a long-term (chronic) illness. Damage caused by a drop in blood flow to vital organs such as the brain, heart, and kidneys may take time to improve. There may be long-term problems with these organs. Prevention 
 
 The risk of sepsis can be reduced by getting all recommended vaccines.  In the hospital, careful hand washing can help prevent hospital-acquired infections that lead to sepsis. Prompt removal of urinary catheters and IV lines when they are no longer needed can also help prevent infections that lead to sepsis. Alternative Names 
 
 Septicemia; Sepsis syndrome; Systemic inflammatory response syndrome; SIRS; Septic shock  Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Munford RS, Suffredini AF. Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 75. Shapiro NI, Zimmer GD, Barkin AZ. Sepsis syndromes. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 138. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3).  JAMA . 2016;315:801-810. PMID 26903338  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26903338 . Read More 
 
 Avian influenza 
 Cellulitis 
 Confusion 
 Intravenous 
 Meningitis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Peritonitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Septic shock 
 Shock 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sepsis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia