
 Septic arthritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Septic arthritis is  inflammation of a joint  due to a bacterial or fungal infection. Septic arthritis that is due to the bacteria that cause  gonorrhea  has different symptoms and is also called  gonococcal arthritis . Causes 
 
 Septic arthritis develops when bacteria or other tiny disease-causing organisms (microorganisms) spread through the blood to a joint. It may also occur when the joint is directly infected with a microorganism from an injury or during surgery. Joints that are commonly affected are the knee and hip.  Most cases of  acute  septic arthritis are caused by  Staphylococcus  or  Streptococcus bacteria . Chronic septic arthritis (which is less common) is caused by organisms including  Mycobacterium tuberculosis  and  Candida albicans . The following conditions increase your risk for septic arthritis: Artificial joint implants Bacterial infection somewhere else in your body Presence of bacteria in your blood Chronic  illness or disease (such as diabetes,  rheumatoid arthritis , and sickle cell disease) Intravenous (IV) or injection drug use Medicines that suppress your immune system Recent joint injury Recent joint arthroscopy or other surgery Septic arthritis may be seen at any age. In children, it occurs most often in those younger than 3 years. The hip is often the site of infection in infants. Most cases are caused by the bacteria group B streptococcus. Another common cause is  Haemophilus influenza , especially if the child has not been vaccinated for this bacteria. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms usually come on quickly. There is a fever and  joint swelling  that is usually in just one joint. There is also intense  joint pain , which gets worse with movement. Symptoms in newborns or infants: Crying when infected joint is moved (for example, during diaper change) Fever Not able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis) Fussiness Symptoms in children and adults: Not able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis) Severe joint pain Joint swelling Joint redness Fever Chills may occur, but are uncommon. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine the joint and ask about the symptoms. Tests that may be done include: Aspiration of joint fluid  for cell count, examination of crystals under the microscope, gram stain, and  culture Blood culture X-ray of affected joint Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to treat the infection. Resting, raising the joint above heart level, and using cool compresses may help relieve pain. After the joint starts to heal, exercising it can help speed recovery. If joint (synovial) fluid builds up quickly due to the infection, a needle may be inserted into the joint often to  aspirate  the fluid. Severe cases may need surgery to drain the infected joint fluid. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is good with prompt antibiotic treatment. If treatment is delayed, permanent joint damage may result. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you develop symptoms of septic arthritis. Prevention 
 
 Preventive (prophylactic) antibiotics may be helpful for people at high risk. Alternative Names 
 
 Bacterial arthritis; Non-gonococcal bacterial arthritis References 
 
 Cook PP, Siraj DS. Bacterial arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds.  Kelly's Textbook of Rheumotology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 109. Krogstad P. Septic arthritis. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ.  Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 56. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Chronic 
 Flu 
 Gonococcal arthritis 
 Group B streptococcal septicemia of the newborn 
 Joint pain 
 Joint swelling 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infectious Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia