
 Serology for brucellosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Serology for brucellosis is a blood test to look for the presence of  antibodies  against  Brucella . This is the bacteria that causes the disease brucellosis.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Brucellosis  is an infection that occurs from coming into contact with animals that carry  Brucella  bacteria. Your health care provider may order this test if you have signs or symptoms of brucellosis. People working in jobs where they often come in contact with animals or meat, such as slaughterhouse workers, farmers, and veterinarians, are most likely to get this disease. Normal Results 
 
 A normal (negative) result usually means you have not come in contact with the bacteria that causes brucellosis. However, this test may not detect the disease at an early stage. Your provider may have you come back for another test in 10 days to 3 weeks.  Infection with other bacteria, such as  Yersinia ,  Francisella , and  Vibrio , and certain immunizations can cause false-positive results.  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal (positive) result usually means you have come in contact with the bacteria that causes brucellosis. However, this positive result does not mean that you have an active infection. Your provider will have you repeat the test after a few weeks to see if the test result increases. This increase is more likely to be a sign of a current infection.  Risks 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 Brucella serology; Brucella antibody test or titer Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Brucellosis agglutinins - blood. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:263-265. Gul HC, Erdem H. Brucellosis ( Brucella species ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 228. Read More 
 
 Antibody 
 Brucellosis 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia