
 Serotonin syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Serotonin syndrome (SS) is a potentially life-threatening drug reaction. It causes the body to have too much serotonin, a chemical produced by nerve cells. Causes 
 
 SS most often occurs when two medicines that affect the body's level of serotonin are taken together at the same time. The medicines cause too much serotonin to be released or to remain in the brain area. For example, you can develop this syndrome if you take  migraine  medicines called triptans together with antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SSNRIs).  Common SSRIs include citalopram (Celexa), sertraline (Zoloft), fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and escitalopram (Lexapro). SSNRIs include duloxetine (Cymbalta) and venlafaxine (Effexor). Common triptans include sumatriptan (Imitrex), zolmitriptan (Zomig), frovatriptan (Frova), rizatriptan (Maxalt), almotriptan (Axert), naratriptan (Amerge), and eletriptan (Relpax). If you take these medicines, be sure to read the warning on the packaging. It tells you about the potential risk of serotonin syndrome. However, do not stop taking your medicine. Talk to your doctor about your concerns first. SS is more likely to occur on starting or increasing the medicine. Older antidepressants called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) can also cause SS with the medicines described above, as well as meperidine (Demerol, a painkiller) or dextromethorphan (cough medicine).  Drugs of abuse, such as ecstasy,  LSD ,  cocaine , and  amphetamines  have also been associated with SS. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms occur within minutes to hours, and may include: Agitation or restlessness Diarrhea Fast heartbeat and high blood pressure Hallucinations Increased body temperature Loss of coordination Nausea and vomiting Overactive reflexes Rapid changes in blood pressure Exams and Tests 
 
 The diagnosis is usually made by asking the person questions about medical history, including the types of drugs. To be diagnosed with SS, the person must have been taking a drug that changes the body's serotonin level (serotonergic drug) and have at least 3 of the following signs or symptoms: Agitation Diarrhea Heavy sweating not due to activity Fever Mental status changes, such as  confusion  or hypomania Muscle spasms (myoclonus) Overactive reflexes ( hyperreflexia ) Shivering Tremor Uncoordinated movements (ataxia)  SS is not diagnosed until all other possible causes have been ruled out. This may include infections, intoxication, metabolic and hormone problems, and drug or alcohol withdrawal. Some symptoms of SS can mimic those due to an overdose of cocaine, lithium, or an MAOI. If a person has just started taking or increased the dosage of a tranquilizer (neuroleptic drug), other conditions such as neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) will be considered. Tests may include: Blood cultures (to check for infection) Complete blood count  (CBC) CT scan of the brain Drug (toxicology) and alcohol screen Electrolyte levels Electrocardiogram (ECG) Kidney and liver function tests Thyroid function tests Treatment 
 
 People with SS will likely stay in the hospital for at least 24 hours for close observation. Treatment may include: Benzodiazepine medicines, such as diazepam (Valium) or lorazepam (Ativan) to decrease agitation, seizure-like movements, and muscle stiffness Cyproheptadine (Periactin), a drug that blocks serotonin production Intravenous (through the vein) fluids Withdrawal of medicines that caused the syndrome  In life-threatening cases, medicines that keep the muscles still (paralyze them), and a temporary breathing tube and breathing machine will be needed to prevent further muscle damage. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People may get slowly worse and can become severely ill if not quickly treated. Untreated, SS can be deadly. With treatment, symptoms usually go away in less than 24 hours. Possible Complications 
 
 Uncontrolled muscle spasms can cause severe muscle breakdown. The products produced when the muscles break down are released into the blood and eventually go through the kidneys. This can cause severe kidney damage if SS isn't recognized and treated properly. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you have symptoms of serotonin syndrome. Prevention 
 
 Always tell your providers which medicines you take. People who take triptans with SSRIs or SSNRIs should be closely followed, especially right after starting a medicine or increasing its dosage. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperserotonemia; Serotonergic syndrome; Serotonin toxicity; SSRI - serotonin syndrome; MAO - serotonin syndrome References 
 
 Brady MF. Serotonin syndrome. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2017 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:1154-1155. Fricchione GL, Beach SR, Huffman JC, Bush G, Stern TA. Life-threatening conditions in psychiatry: catatonia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and serotonin syndrome. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.  Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 55. Levine M, Ruha AM. Antidepressants. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 151. Read More 
 
 Depression - overview 
 
 Review Date 5/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services / Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Antidepressants 
 Migraine 
 Browse the Encyclopedia