
 Serum globulin electrophoresis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The serum globulin electrophoresis test measures the levels of proteins called globulins in the fluid part of a blood sample. This fluid is called serum. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. In the lab, the technician places the blood sample on special paper and applies an electric current. The proteins move on the paper and form bands that show the amount of each protein.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be asked not to eat or drink (fast) for 4 hours before this test.  Certain medicines may affect the results of this test. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines. Do not stop any medicine before talking to your provider. Medicines that can affect the test results include: Chlorpromazine Corticosteroids Phenacemide Salicylates Some kinds of antibiotics  Tolbutamide How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to look at globulin proteins in the blood. Identifying the types of globulins can help diagnose certain medical problems. Globulins are roughly divided into 3 groups: alpha, beta, and gamma globulins. Gamma globulines include various types of antibodies such as immunoglobulins (Ig) M, G, and A. Certain diseases are associated with producing too many immunoglobulins. For example,  Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia  is a cancer of certain white blood cells. It is linked with producing too many IgM antibodies. Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges are: Serum globulin: 2.0 to 3.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) or 20 to 35 grams per liter (g/L)  IgM component: 75 to 300 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 750 to 3000 milligrams per liter (mg/L) IgG component: 650 to 1850 mg/dL or 6.5 to 18.50 g/L IgA component: 90 to 350 mg/dL or 900 to 3500 mg/L Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Increased gamma globulin proteins may indicate: Acute  infection Bone marrow cancer called  multiple myeloma Chronic  inflammatory disease (for example,  rheumatoid arthritis  and  systemic lupus erythematosus ) Overactive immune system ( hyperimmunization ) Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia Risks 
 
 There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from 1 person to another, and from 1 side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)  Alternative Names 
 
 Globulin electrophoresis; Waldenstrom - serum globulin Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Dominiczak MH, Fraser WD. Blood and plasma proteins. In: Baynes JW, Dominiczak MH, eds.  Medical Biochemistry . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 4. Rajkumar SV. Plasma cell disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 187. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Albumin - blood (serum) test 
 Amino acids 
 Antibody 
 Chronic 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hyperimmunization 
 Immunoelectrophoresis - blood 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Protein electrophoresis - serum 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Total protein 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lupus 
 Lymphoma 
 Multiple Myeloma 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia