
 Serum sickness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Serum sickness is a reaction that is similar to an  allergy . The  immune system reacts  to medicines that contain proteins used to treat immune conditions. Or it can react to antiserum, the liquid part of blood that contains  antibodies  given to a person to help protect them against germs or poisonous substances. Causes 
 
 Plasma is the clear fluid portion of blood. It does not contain blood cells. But it does contain many proteins, including antibodies, which are formed as part of the immune response to protect against infection. Antiserum is produced from the plasma of a person or animal that has immunity against an infection or poisonous substance. Antiserum may be used to protect a person who has been exposed to a germ or toxin. For example, you may receive a certain type of antiserum injection: If you have been exposed to  tetanus  or  rabies  and have never been vaccinated against these germs. This is called passive immunization. If you have been bitten by a snake that produces a dangerous toxin. During serum sickness, the immune system falsely identifies a protein in antiserum as a harmful substance ( antigen ). The result is an immune system response that attacks the antiserum. Immune system elements and the antiserum combine to form immune complexes, which cause the symptoms of serum sickness. Certain medicines (such as penicillin, cefaclor, and sulfa) can cause a similar reaction. Injected proteins such as antithymocyte globulin (used to treat organ transplant rejection) and rituximab (used to treat immune disorders and cancers) can cause serum sickness reactions. Blood products may also cause serum sickness. Symptoms 
 
 Unlike other  drug allergies , which occur very soon after receiving the medicine, serum sickness develops 7 to 21 days after the first exposure to a medicine. Some people develop symptoms in 1 to 3 days if they have already been exposed to the medicine. Symptoms of serum sickness can include: Fever General ill feeling Hives Itching Joint pain Rash Swollen lymph nodes  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform an exam to look for lymph nodes that are enlarged and tender to the touch. Tests that may be done include: Urine test Blood test Treatment 
 
 Medicines, such as corticosteroids, applied to the skin may relieve discomfort from itching and a rash. Antihistamines may shorten the length of the illness and help ease a rash and itching. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen or naproxen, may relieve joint pain. Corticosteroids taken by mouth may be prescribed for severe cases. The medicine that caused the problem should be stopped. Avoid using that medicine or antiserum in the future. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The symptoms usually go away within a few days. Possible Complications 
 
 If you use the drug or antiserum that caused serum sickness again in the future, your risk of having another similar reaction is high. Complications include: Inflammation of the blood vessels Swelling of the face, arms, and legs ( angioedema ) When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you received medicine or antiserum in the last 4 weeks and have symptoms of serum sickness. Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent the development of serum sickness.  People who have had serum sickness or drug allergy should avoid future use of the antiserum or drug. Alternative Names 
 
 Drug allergy - serum sickness; Allergic reaction - serum sickness; Allergy - serum sickness Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Frank MM, Hester CG. Immune complex-mediated diseases. In: Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 38. Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Sicherer SH. Serum sickness. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 150. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Antibody 
 Antigen 
 Drug allergies 
 Immune response 
 Protein in diet 
 Rabies 
 Tetanus 
 
 Review Date 3/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Stuart I. Henochowicz, MD, FACP, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.     
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Immune System and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia