
 Shampoo - swallowing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Shampoo is a liquid used to clean the scalp and hair. This article describes the effects of swallowing a liquid shampoo. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Where Found 
 
 Various liquid shampoos Symptoms 
 
 Vomiting Diarrhea If you have an allergy to a dye in the shampoo, you may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing. Home Care 
 
 Shampoo is considered relatively nontoxic (nonpoisonous). If an allergic reaction occurs, seek immediate medical help. Call 911 or your local emergency number. Call  poison control  for further information. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 An emergency room visit may not be needed. If a visit takes place, the health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive: Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms  A person who has an allergic reaction may need: Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Swallowing shampoo is usually not poisonous. Most people make a full recovery. Alternative Names 
 
 Swallowing shampoo References 
 
 Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 147. 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia