
 Shellac poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Shellac poisoning can occur from swallowing shellac. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substances in shellac that can be harmful are: Ethanol Isopropanol Methanol Methyl isobutyl ketone Where Found 
 
 These substances are found in: Paint remover Shellac Wood finishing products Other products may also contain these substances. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of shellac poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blindness Blurred vision Wide pupils  HEART AND BLOOD Low blood pressure Severe change of acid level in the blood, which can cause organ failure Weakness Collapse KIDNEYS Kidney failure  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Rapid, shallow breathing Fluid in the lungs Blood in the lungs Stopped breathing (see  Breathing difficulties - first aid ) MUSCLES AND BONES Leg cramps NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma  (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) Dizziness Fatigue Headache  Convulsions SKIN: Blue-colored skin, lips, or fingernails STOMACH AND INTESTINES Diarrhea Nausea Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Seek medical help right away. If the shellac is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the shellac was swallowed, give water to the person right away, unless instructed otherwise by a provider. Do NOT give water if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (and ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.  The person may receive: Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Bronchoscopy: camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Endoscopy: camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach Hemodialysis (kidney machine) Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicine (antidote) to reverse the effect of the poison Surgery to remove burned skin Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Isopropanol and methanol are extremely poisonous. As little as 2 tablespoons (14.8 mL) of methanol can kill a child, while 2 to 8 ounces (59 to 236 mL) can be deadly for adults. How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. References 
 
 Jacobsen D, Hovda KE. Methanol, ethylene glycol, and other toxic alcohols. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 32. White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Browse the Encyclopedia