
 Short stature 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A child who has short stature is much shorter than children who are the same age and sex. Your health care provider will go over your child's growth chart with you. A child with short stature's height is: 2 standard deviations (SD) or more below the average height for children of the same sex and age Below the 2.3rd percentile on the growth chart: Out of 1,000 boys (or girls) who were born on the same day, 977 of the children are taller than your son or daughter Considerations 
 
 Your child's provider checks how your child is growing at regular checkups. The provider will: Record your child's height and weight on a growth chart. Monitor your child's growth rate over time. Ask the provider what percentile your child is for height and weight. Compare your child's height and weight to other children of the same age and sex. Talk with you if you are worried that your child is shorter than other children. If your child has short stature, this does not necessarily mean that something is wrong.  Causes 
 
 There are many reasons why your child has short stature. Most of the time, there is no medical cause for short stature.  Your child may be small for her age, but is growing OK. She will probably start puberty later than her friends. Your child will most likely keep growing after most of her peers have stopped growing, and will probably be as tall as her parents. Providers call this "constitutional growth delay." If one or both parents are short, your child will most likely also be short. Your child should get as tall as one of her parents.  Sometimes, short stature may be a symptom of a medical condition. Bone or skeletal disorders, such as:  Rickets Achondroplasia Chronic diseases, such as: Asthma Celiac disease Congenital heart disease Cushing disease Diabetes Hypothyroidism Inflammatory bowel disease Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Kidney disease Sickle cell anemia Thalassemia Genetic conditions, such as:  Down syndrome Noonan syndrome Russell-Silver syndrome Turner syndrome Williams syndrome Other reasons include: Growth hormone deficiency Infections of the developing baby before birth Malnutrition Poor growth of a baby while in the womb ( intrauterine growth restriction ) or  small for gestational age This list does not include every possible cause of short stature. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your child appears to be much shorter than most children his age, or if he seems to have stopped growing. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. The provider will measure your child's height, weight, and arm and leg lengths.  To figure out possible causes of your child's short stature, the provider will ask about your child's history.  If your child's short stature may be due to a medical condition, your child will need lab tests and x-rays. Bone age x-rays are most often taken of the left wrist or hand. The provider looks at the x-ray to see if the size and shape of your child's bones have grown normally. If the bones have not grown as expected for your child's age, the provider will talk more about why your child may not be growing normally.  Your child may have other tests if another medical condition may be involved, including: Complete blood count Growth hormone stimulation Thyroid function tests Insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-1) level Blood tests to look for liver, kidney, thyroid, immune system, and other medical problems  Your provider keeps records of your child's height and weight. Keep your own records, too. Bring these records to your provider's attention if the growth seems slow or your child seems small. TREATMENT Your child's short stature may affect her self-esteem.  Check in with your child about relationships with friends and classmates. Kids tease each other about many things, including height. Give your child emotional support. Help family, friends, and teachers emphasize your child's skills and strengths.  TREATMENT WITH GROWTH HORMONE INJECTIONS If your child has  no or low levels of growth hormone , your provider may talk about treatment with  growth hormone injections .  Most children have normal growth hormone levels and will not need growth hormone injections. If your child is a boy with short stature and delayed puberty, your provider may talk about using testosterone injections to jump start growth. But this is not likely to increase adult height. Alternative Names 
 
 Idiopathic short stature; Non-growth hormone deficient short stature Images 
 
 
 Height/weight chart 
 References 
 
 Cohen LE. Idiopathic short stature: a clinical review.  JAMA . 2014;311(17);1787-1796. PMID: 24794372  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24794372 . Cohen P, Rogol AD, Deal CL, et al. Wit JM: 2007 ISS Consensus Workshop participants. Consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of children with idiopathic short stature: a summary of the Growth Hormone Research Society, the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society, and the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology Workshop.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93(11):4210-4217. PMID: 18782877  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18782877 . Cooke DW, Divall SA, Radovick S. Normal and aberrant growth in children. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 24. Keane VA. Assessment of growth. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 15. Sisley S, Trujillo MV, Khoury J, Backeljauw P. Low incidence of pathology detection and high cost of screening in the evaluation of symptomatic short children.  J Pediatr . 2013;163:1045. PMID: 23706358  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23706358 . van Gool SA, Kamp GA, Odink RJ, et al. High-dose GH treatment limited to the prepubertal period in young children with idiopathic short stature does not increase adult height.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2010;162(4):653-660. PMID: 2011040  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20110402 .  
 Review Date 7/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Growth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia