
 Short bowel syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Short bowel syndrome is a problem that occurs when part of the small intestine is missing or has been removed during surgery. Nutrients are  not properly absorbed into the body  as a result. Causes 
 
 The small intestine absorbs much of the nutrients found in foods we eat. When one half or more of our small intestine is missing, the body may not absorb enough food to stay healthy and maintain your weight. Some infants are born missing part or much of their small intestine. More often, short bowel syndrome occurs because much of the small intestine is removed during surgery. This type of surgery may be needed: After gunshots or other trauma damaged the intestines For someone with severe  Crohn disease For infants, often born too early, when  part of their intestines dies Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Diarrhea Fatigue Pale, greasy stools Swelling ( edema ), especially of the legs Very  foul-smelling stools Weight loss Dehydration Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be done: Blood chemistry tests (such as  albumin level ) Complete blood count (CBC) Fecal fat  test Small intestine x-ray Vitamin levels in the blood Treatment 
 
 Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms and ensuring the body receives enough nutrients. A high-calorie diet that supplies: Key vitamins and minerals, such as  iron , folic acid, and  vitamin B12 Enough carbohydrates, proteins, and fats If needed, injections of some vitamins and minerals or special growth factors will be given. Medicines to slow down the normal movement of the intestine can be tried. This may allow food to remain in the intestine longer. If the body is not able to absorb enough nutrients,  total parenteral nutrition (TPN)  is tried. It will help you or your child get nutrition from a special formula through a vein in the body. Your health care provider will select the right amount of calories and TPN solution. Sometimes, you can also eat and drink while getting nutrition from TPN. Small bowel transplantation is an option in some cases. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The condition may improve over time if it is due to surgery. Nutrient absorption may slowly get better. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine Nervous system problems caused by a lack of vitamin B12  Too much acid in the blood (metabolic  acidosis  due to diarrhea) Gallstones Kidney stones Malnutrition Weakened bones (osteomalacia) Weight loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of short bowel syndrome, especially after you have had bowel surgery. Alternative Names 
 
 Small intestine insufficiency; Short gut syndrome; Necrotizing enterocolitis - short bowel Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Buchman AL. Short bowel syndrome. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 106. Caplan M. Necrotizing enterocolitis and short bowel syndrome. In: Gleason CA, Devaskar SU, eds.  Avery's Diseases of the Newborn . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 73. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Acidosis 
 Crohn disease 
 Gallstones 
 Kidney stones 
 Malabsorption 
 Necrotizing enterocolitis 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia