
 Shoulder CT scan 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A computed tomography (CT) scan of the shoulder is an imaging method that uses x-rays to create cross-sectional pictures of the shoulder. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the CT scanner. Once you are inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you. (Modern "spiral" scanners can perform the exam without stopping.) A computer creates separate images of the shoulder area. These are called slices. These images can be stored, viewed on a monitor, or printed on film. Three-dimensional models of the shoulder area can be created by adding the slices together. You must be still during the exam, because movement causes blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short periods of time. The scan should take only 10 to 15 minutes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Certain exams require a special dye, called contrast, to be delivered into the body before the test starts. Contrast helps certain areas show up better on the x-rays. Contrast can be given through a vein (IV) in your hand or forearm. If contrast is used, you may also be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test. Let your health care provider know if you have ever had a reaction to contrast. You may need to take medicines before the test in order to safely receive this substance. Before receiving the contrast, tell your provider if you take the diabetes medicine metformin (Glucophage) because you may need to take extra precautions.  If you weigh more than 300 pounds (135 kilograms), find out if the CT machine has a weight limit. Too much weight can cause damage to the scanner's working parts. You will be asked to remove jewelry and wear a hospital gown during the study. How the Test Will Feel 
 
 Some people may have discomfort from lying on the hard table. Contrast given through an IV may cause a slight burning sensation, a metallic taste in the mouth, and a warm flushing of the body. These sensations are normal and most often go away within a few seconds. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 CT rapidly creates detailed pictures of the shoulder. The test may help diagnose or detect: A  dislocation ,  fracture , or other shoulder injury Evaluate the soft tissue such as rotator cuff tendons Abscess  or infection The cause of pain or other problems in the shoulder joint when  MRI  cannot be done Masses and tumors, including cancer  This test may also help guide a surgeon to the right area during a biopsy in the shoulder area. Normal Results 
 
 Results are considered normal if the shoulder being examined is normal in appearance. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Abscess  (collection of pus) Bone tumors or cancer Dislocated  shoulder Shoulder fracture Rotator cuff tears Risks 
 
 Risks of CT scans include: Being exposed to radiation Allergic reaction to contrast dye  CT scans do expose you to more radiation than regular x-rays. Having many x-rays or CT scans over time may increase your risk for cancer. However, the risk from any one scan is small. You and your provider should weigh this risk against the benefits of getting a correct diagnosis for a medical problem.  Some people have allergies to contrast dye. Let your provider know if you have ever had an allergic reaction to injected contrast dye. The most common type of contrast given into a vein contains iodine. If a person with an iodine allergy is given this type of contrast,  nausea or vomiting ,  sneezing ,  itching , or  hives  may occur. If you absolutely must be given such contrast, you may need to get antihistamines (such as Benadryl) or steroids before the test. The kidneys help remove iodine out of the body. Those with kidney disease or diabetes may need to receive extra fluids after the test to help flush the iodine out of the body.  Rarely, the dye may cause a life-threatening allergic response called  anaphylaxis . If you have any trouble breathing during the test, you should notify the scanner operator immediately. Scanners come with an intercom and speakers, so the operator can hear you at all times. Alternative Names 
 
 CAT scan - shoulder; Computed axial tomography scan - shoulder; Computed tomography scan - shoulder; CT scan - shoulder References 
 
 Perez EA. Fractures of the Shoulder, Arm, and Forearm. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 57.  Shaw AS, Prokop M. Computed tomography. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 4. Thomsen HS, Reimer P. Intravascular contrast media for radiology, CT, and MRI In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 2. Read More 
 
 Rotator cuff problems 
 Shoulder arthroscopy 
 Shoulder pain 
 Shoulder replacement 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Rotator cuff exercises 
 Rotator cuff - self-care 
 Shoulder replacement - discharge  
 Shoulder surgery - discharge  
 Using your shoulder after replacement surgery 
 Review Date 3/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 CT Scans 
 Shoulder Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia