
 Silent thyroiditis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Silent thyroiditis is an immune reaction of the thyroid gland. The disorder can cause hyperthyroidism, followed by hypothyroidism. The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle. Causes 
 
 The cause of the disease is unknown. But it is related to an immune attack against the thyroid by the  immune system . The disease affects women more often than men. The disease can occur in women who have just had a baby. It can also be caused by medicines such as interferon and amiodarone, which affect the immune system. Symptoms 
 
 The earliest symptoms result from an overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ). These symptoms may last for up to 3 months. Symptoms are often mild, and may include: Fatigue , feeling weak
  Frequent bowel movements Heat intolerance Increased appetite Increased  sweating Irregular menstrual periods Mood changes, such as irritability Muscle cramps Nervousness,  restlessness Palpitations Weight loss  Later symptoms may be of an underactive thyroid ( hypothyroidism ), including fatigue and cold intolerance, until the thyroid recovers. Some people only notice the hypothyroid symptoms and do not have symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms and medical history. A  physical examination  may show: 
   Enlarged thyroid gland that is not painful to the touch
    
   Rapid heart rate
    
   Shaking hands (tremor)
    Tests that may be done include: Radioactive iodine uptake Thyroid hormones  T3  and  T4  TSH Treatment 
 
 Treatment is based on symptoms. Medicines called beta-blockers may be used to relieve rapid heart rate and excessive sweating. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Silent thyroiditis often goes away on its own within 1 year. The  acute  phase ends within 3 months. Some people develop hypothyroidism over time. They need to be treated for a while with levothyroxine, a medicine that replaces thyroid hormone. Regular follow-ups with a provider are recommended. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Lymphocytic thyroiditis; Subacute lymphocytic thyroiditis; Painless thyroiditis; Postpartum thyroiditis; Thyroiditis - silent; Hyperthyroidism - silent thyroiditis Images 
 
 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12. Pellitteri PK, Ing S, Jameson B. Disorders of the thyroid gland. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 122. Read More 
 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia