
 Sinus x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sinus  x-ray  is an imaging test to look at the sinuses. These are the air-filled spaces in the front of the skull. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sinus x-ray is taken in a hospital radiology department. Or the x-ray may be taken in the health care provider's office. You are asked to sit in a chair so that any fluid in the sinuses can be seen in the x-ray images. The technologist may place your head in different positions as the images are taken. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell your doctor if you are or think you are pregnant. You will be asked to remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is little or no discomfort with a sinus x-ray. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The sinuses are located behind the forehead, nasal bones, cheeks, and eyes. When the sinus openings become blocked or too much mucus builds up, bacteria and other germs can grow. This can lead to an infection and inflammation of the sinuses called  sinusitis . A sinus x-ray is ordered when you have any of the following: Symptoms of sinusitis Other sinus disorders, such as a deviated septum (crooked or bent septum, the structure that separates the nostrils) Symptoms of another infection of that area of the head These days, a sinus x-ray is not often ordered. This is because a  CT scan of the sinuses  shows more detail. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The x-ray may detect an infection, blockages, bleeding or tumors. Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated so that the lowest amount of radiation is used to produce the image. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays. Alternative Names 
 
 Paranasal sinus radiography; X-ray - sinuses Images 
 
 
 Sinuses 
 References 
 
 Beale T, Brown J, Rout J. ENT, neck, and dental radiology. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 67. Read More 
 
 Meningitis 
 Mucosa 
 Orbital cellulitis 
 Sinusitis 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, Specialist in Laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Meningitis 
 Sinusitis 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia