
 Sjögren syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sjögren syndrome is an  autoimmune disorder  in which the glands that produce tears and saliva are destroyed. This causes dry mouth and dry eyes. The condition may affect other parts of the body, including the kidneys and lungs. Causes 
 
 The cause of Sjögren syndrome is unknown. It is an autoimmune disorder. This means the body attacks healthy tissue by mistake. The syndrome occurs most often in women ages 40 to 50. It is rare in children. Primary Sjögren syndrome is defined as dry eyes and dry mouth without another autoimmune disorder. Secondary Sjögren syndrome occurs along with another autoimmune disorder, such as: Rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) Systemic lupus erythematosus Scleroderma Polymyositis Symptoms 
 
 Dry eyes and dry mouth are the most common symptoms of this syndrome.  
 Eye symptoms: 
  Itching eyes Feeling that something is in the eye  
 Mouth and throat symptoms: 
  Difficulty swallowing or eating dry foods Loss of sense of taste Problems speaking Thick or stringy saliva Mouth sores or pain Teeth decay and gum inflammation Hoarseness  
 Other symptoms may include: Fatigue Fever Change in the color of hands or feet Joint pain  or  joint swelling Swollen glands Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam reveals dry eyes and dry mouth. There may be  mouth sores , decayed teeth or gum inflammation. This occurs because of the mouth dryness. Your health care provider will look in your mouth for fungus infection (Candida). You may have the following tests done: Antinuclear  antibodies  ( ANA ) test Rheumatoid factor  (possible) Schirmer test  of tear production Salivary gland biopsy Examination of the eyes Treatment 
 
 The goal is to relieve symptoms. Dry eyes may be treated with artificial tears, eye-lubricating ointments, or cyclosporine liquid. If Candida is present, it may be treated with sugar-free miconazole or nystatin preparations. Tiny plugs can be placed in the tear drainage ducts to help the tears stay on the surface of the eye.  Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) similar to those used for rheumatoid arthritis may improve the symptoms of Sjögren syndrome. These include tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibiting drugs such as Enbrel, Humira or Remicaide. Some things you can do to ease symptoms include: Sip water throughout the day Chew sugarless gum Avoid medicines that can cause mouth dryness, such as antihistamines and decongestants Avoid alcohol  Talk with your dentist about: Mouth rinses to replace minerals in your teeth Saliva substitutes Drugs that help your salivary glands make more saliva  To prevent dental decay caused by mouth dryness: Brush and floss your teeth often Visit the dentist for regular checkups and cleanings  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The disease is most often not life-threatening. The outcome depends on what other diseases you have. There is a higher risk for  lymphoma  when Sjögren syndrome has been very active for a long time. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Damage to the eye Dental cavities Kidney failure  (rare) Lymphoma Pulmonary infections Vasculitis (rare)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of Sjögren syndrome. Alternative Names 
 
 Xerostomia-Sjögren syndrome; Keratoconjunctivitis sicca - Sjögren; Sicca syndrome Images 
 
 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Baer AN, Hall JC. Sjogren syndrome. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatolgy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 138. Kruszka P, O'Brian RJ. Diagnosis and management of Sjogren syndrome.  Am Fam Physician . 2009;79(6):465-470. PMID: 19323359  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19323359 . Ramos-Casals M, Brito-Zerón P, Sisó-Almirall A, Bosch X, Tzioufas AG. Topical and systemic medications for the treatment of primary Sjögren's syndrome.  Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2012;8(7):399-411. PMID: 22549247  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22549247 . St. Clair WE. Sjogren's syndrome. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 73. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Polymyositis - adult 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Scleroderma 
 Systemic 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 
 Review Date 4/28/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sjogren's Syndrome 
 Browse the Encyclopedia