
 Skeletal limb abnormalities 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Skeletal limb abnormalities refers to a variety of bone structure problems in the arms or legs (limbs). Considerations 
 
 The term skeletal limb abnormalities is most often used to describe defects in the legs or arms that are due to a problem with your genes or chromosomes, or that occur due to an event that happens during pregnancy. The abnormalities are often present at birth. Limb abnormalities can develop after birth if a person has rickets or other diseases that affect bone structure. Causes 
 
 Skeletal limb abnormalities may be due to any of the following: Cancer Genetic diseases and chromosomal abnormalities, including  Marfan syndrome ,  Down syndrome ,  Apert syndrome , and  Basal cell nevus syndrome Improper position in the womb Infections during pregnancy Injury during birth Malnutrition Metabolic disorders Pregnancy problems, including limb amputation from amniotic band disruption sequence Use of certain medicines during pregnancy including thalidomide, which causes the upper part of the arms or legs to be missing and aminopterin which leads to shortness of the forearm  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any concerns about limb length or appearance. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 An infant with limb abnormalities generally has other symptoms and signs that, when taken together, define a specific syndrome or condition or give a clue as to the cause of the abnormality. Diagnosis is based on a family history, medical history, and thorough physical evaluation. Medical history questions may include: Does anyone in your family have skeletal abnormalities? Were there any problems during pregnancy? What drugs or medicines were taken during the pregnancy? What other symptoms or abnormalities are present?  Other tests such as  chromosome studies ,  enzyme  assays, x-rays, and metabolic studies may be done. References 
 
 Deeney VF, Arnold J, Moreland MS, Ward WT, Davix HW. Orthopedics. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds.  Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Francomano CA. Skeletal dysplasias. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 211. Read More 
 
 Rickets 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arm Injuries and Disorders 
 Bone Diseases 
 Leg Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia