
 Skin or nail culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A skin or nail culture is a laboratory test to look for and identify germs that cause problems with the skin or nails. It is called a mucosal culture if the sample involves the mucous membranes. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider may use a cotton swab to collect a sample from an open skin rash or skin sore. A sample of skin may need to be taken. This is called a  skin biopsy . Before the skin sample is removed, you will likely receive a shot (injection) of numbing medicine to prevent pain. A small sample of a fingernail or toenail may be taken. The sample is sent to a lab. There, it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched to see if bacteria, viruses, or fungi grow. It may take up to 3 weeks to get results of a nail culture. Further tests can be done to identify the specific germ that is causing your problem. This can help your provider determine the best treatment. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no preparation needed for this test. If a skin or  mucosal  sample is needed, your provider will tell you how to prepare. How the Test will Feel 
 
 If a skin sample is taken, you may feel a sting when the shot of numbing medicine is given. For a nail sample, the provider scrapes the affected area of the nail. There is usually no pain. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done to diagnose the cause of: A bacteria or fungus infection of the skin, finger, or toenail 
  A skin rash or sore that appears to be infected A skin ulcer that is not healing Normal Results 
 
 A normal result means no disease-causing germs are seen in the culture. Some germs normally live on the skin. These are not a sign of infection and are considered a normal finding. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal result means bacteria, fungus, or virus is present. This may be a sign of infection. Common skin infections caused by bacteria include: Impetigo Diabetes foot ulcers  Common skin infections caused by fungus include: Athlete's foot Nail infections Scalp infections Risks 
 
 Risks include slight bleeding or infection in the area where the skin sample was removed. Alternative Names 
 
 Mucosal culture; Culture - skin; Culture - mucosal; Nail culture; Culture - fingernail; Fingernail culture Images 
 
 
 Yeast and mold 
 References 
 
 Croft AC, Woods GL. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 63. High WA, Tomasini CF, Argenziano G, Zalaudek I. Basic principles of dermatology. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 0. 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia