
 Skin - clammy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Clammy skin is cool, moist, and usually  pale . Considerations 
 
 Clammy skin may be an emergency. Call your doctor or your local emergency number, such as 911.  Causes 
 
 Causes of clammy skin include: Anxiety  attack Heart attack Heat exhaustion Internal bleeding Low blood oxygen levels Sepsis (body-wide infection) Severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) Severe pain Shock  (low blood pressure) Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on what is causing the clammy skin. Call for medical help if you are not sure. If you think the person is in shock, lie him or her down on the back and raise the legs about 12 inches (30 centimeters). Call your local emergency number (such as 911) or take the person to the hospital. If the clammy skin may be due to heat exhaustion and the person is awake and can swallow: Have the person drink plenty of fluids Move the person to a cool, shaded place When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek immediate medical help if the person has any of the following signs or symptoms: Altered medical status or thinking ability Chest, abdominal, or back pain or discomfort Headache Passage of blood in the stool: black stool, bright red or maroon blood Recurrent or persistent vomiting, especially of blood Possible drug abuse Shortness of breath Signs of shock (such as confusion, lower level of alertness, or weak pulse)  Always contact your doctor or go to the emergency department if the symptoms do not go away quickly. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about the symptoms and the person's medical history, including: How quickly did the clammy skin develop? Has it ever happened before? Has the person been injured? Is the person in pain? Does the person seem anxious or stressed? Has the person recently been exposed to high temperatures? What other symptoms are present?  Alternative Names 
 
 Sweat - cold; Clammy skin; Cold sweat References 
 
 Jones AE, Kline JA. Shock. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 6. Read More 
 
 Paleness 
 
 Review Date 1/26/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sweat 
 Browse the Encyclopedia