
 Skin - abnormally dark or light 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Skin that has turned darker or lighter than normal is usually not a sign of a serious medical condition. Considerations 
 
 Normal skin contains cells called melanocytes. These cells produce  melanin , the substance that gives skin its color. Skin with too much melanin is called hyperpigmented skin. Skin with too little melanin is called hypopigmented skin. Pale  skin areas are due to too little melanin or underactive melanocytes. Darker areas of skin (or an area that tans more easily) occurs when you have more melanin or overactive melanocytes. Bronzing of the skin may sometimes be mistaken for a suntan. This skin discoloration often develops slowly, starting at the elbows, knuckles, and knees and spreading from there. Bronzing may also be seen on the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands. The bronze color can range from light to dark (in fair-skinned people) with the degree of darkness due to the underlying cause. Causes 
 
 Causes of hyperpigmentation include: Skin inflammation (post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation) Use of certain drugs (such as minocycline and birth control pills) Endocrine diseases such as  Addison disease Hemochromatosis (iron overload) Sun exposure Pregnancy Causes of hypopigmentation include: Skin inflammation Certain fungal infections (such as tinea versicolor) Pityriasis alba Vitiligo Certain medicines Skin condition called idiopathic guttate hyomelanosis Home Care 
 
 Over-the-counter and prescription creams are available for lightening the skin. If you use these creams, follow instructions carefully, and don't use one for more than 3 weeks at a time. Darker skin requires greater care when using these preparations. Cosmetics may also help cover a discoloration. Avoid too much sun exposure. Always use sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher. Abnormally dark skin may continue even after treatment.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider for an appointment if you have: Skin discoloration that causes significant concern Persistent, unexplained darkening or lightening of the skin Any skin sore or lesion that changes shape, size, or color may be a sign of skin cancer  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, including: When did the discoloration develop? Did it develop suddenly? Is it getting worse? How fast? Has it spread to other parts of the body? What medicines do you take? Has anyone else in your family had a similar problem? How often are you in the sun? Do you use a sun lamp or go to tanning salons? What is your diet like? What other symptoms do you have? For example, are there any rashes or  skin lesions ?  Tests that may be done include: Adrenocorticotropin hormone stimulation test Skin biopsy Thyroid function studies Wood lamp  test KOH test Your provider may recommend creams, ointments, surgery, or phototherapy, depending on the type of skin condition you have. Bleaching creams can help lighten dark areas of skin. Some skin color changes may return to normal without treatment. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyperpigmentation; Hypopigmentation Images 
 
 
 Vitiligo, drug induced 
 Vitiligo on the face 
 Incontinentia pigmenti on the leg 
 Incontinentia pigmenti on the leg 
 Hyperpigmentation 2 
 Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation - calf 
 Hyperpigmentation w/malignancy 
 Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation 2 
 References 
 
 Chang MW. Disorders of hyperpigmentation. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 67. Ortonne JP, Passeron T. Vitiligo and other disorders of hypopigmentation. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 66. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Melanin 
 Paleness 
 Skin color - patchy 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Pigmentation Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia