
 Skin lesion biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A skin lesion biopsy is when a small amount of skin is removed so it can be examined. The skin is tested to look for skin conditions or diseases. A skin biopsy can help your health care provider diagnose or rule out problems such as skin cancer or psoriasis. How the Test is Performed 
 
 There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Most procedures can be done in your provider's office or an outpatient medical office. It will take about 15 minutes. Which procedure you have depends on the location, size, and type of lesion. A lesion is an abnormal area of the skin. This can be a lump, sore, or an area of skin color that is not normal. Before a biopsy, your provider will numb the area of skin so you don't feel anything. The different types of skin biopsies are described below. SHAVE BIOPSY  Your provider uses a small blade or razor to remove or scrape the outermost layers of skin. Your provider will remove all or part of the lesion. You will not need stitches. This procedure will leave a small indented area. This type of biopsy is often done when a skin cancer is suspected. PUNCH BIOPSY Your provider uses a skin punch tool to remove deeper layers of skin. The area removed is about the shape and size of a pencil eraser. It includes all or part of the lesion. You may have stitches to close the area. This type of biopsy is often done to diagnose  rashes . EXCISIONAL BIOPSY A surgeon uses a surgical knife (scalpel) to remove the entire lesion. This may include deep layers of skin and fat. The area is closed with stitches to place the skin back together. If a large area is biopsied, the surgeon may use a  skin graft or flap  to replace the skin that was removed. This type of biopsy is done when a kind of skin cancer called  melanoma  is suspected. INCISIONAL BIOPSY This procedure takes a piece of a large lesion. A piece of the growth is cut and sent to the lab for examination. You may have stitches, if needed. After diagnosis, the rest of the growth can be treated. MOHS MICROSURGERY This  procedure  allows skin cancer to be removed with less damage to the healthy skin around it. It is most often done to remove skin lesions on the eyelids, nose, ears, lips, or hands. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 
 
Tell your provider: About the medicines you are taking, including vitamins and supplements, herbal remedies, and over-the-counter medicines If you have any  allergies If you have  bleeding  problems or take a blood thinner drug such as aspirin, warfarin, or Plavix If you are or think you might be pregnant Follow your provider's instructions on how to prepare for the biopsy. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 

Your provider may order a skin biopsy: To diagnose the cause of a skin rash To make sure a skin growth or skin lesion is not  skin cancer Normal Results 
 
 

The tissue that was removed is examined under a microscope. Results are most often returned in a few days to a week or more. If a skin lesion is benign (not cancer), you may not need any further treatment. If the whole skin lesion was not removed at the time of biopsy, you and your provider may decide to completely remove it. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Once the biopsy confirms the diagnosis, your provider will start a treatment plan. A few of the skin problems that may be diagnosed are: Psoriasis Infection from bacteria or fungus Melanoma Basal cell skin cancer Squamous cell skin cancer Risks 
 
 Risks of a skin biopsy may include: Infection Scar or  keloids You will bleed slightly during the procedure. Tell your provider if you have a history of bleeding problems. Considerations 
 
 You will go home with a bandage over the area. The biopsy area may be tender for a few days afterward. You may have a small amount of bleeding. Depending on what type of biopsy you had, you will be given instructions on how to care for: The skin biopsy area Stitches, if you have them Skin graft or flap, if you have one The goal is to keep the area clean and dry. Be careful not to bump or stretch the skin near the area, which can cause bleeding. If you have stitches, they will be taken out in about 3 to 14 days. If you have moderate bleeding, apply pressure to the area for 10 minutes or so. If the bleeding does not stop, call your provider right away. You should also call your provider if you have signs of infection, such as: More redness and swelling Drainage coming from or around the incision that is thick, tan, green, or yellow, or smells bad (pus) Fever Once the wound heals, you may have a scar. Images 
 
 
 Basal cell carcinoma - nose 
 Basal Cell Carcinoma - close-up 
 Melanoma - neck 
 References 
 
 Affleck AG, Colver G. Skin biopsy techniques. In: Robinson JK, Hanke CW, Siegel DM, et al, eds.  Surgery of the Skin: Procedural Dermatology.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 11. Habif TP. Dermatologic surgical procedures. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 27. Olbricht S. Biopsy techniques and basic excisions. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology.  3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 146. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Chronic 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Richard J. Moskowitz, MD, dermatologist in private practice, Mineola, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update: 03/09/2016. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Skin Cancer 
 Skin Conditions 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia