
 Skin lumps 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Skin lumps are any abnormal bumps or swellings on the skin. Considerations 
 
 Most lumps and swellings are  benign  (not cancerous) and are harmless, especially the kind that feel soft and roll easily under the fingers (such as lipomas). A lump or swelling that appears suddenly (over 24 to 48 hours) and is painful is usually caused by an injury or an infection. Causes 
 
 Common causes of skin lumps include: Lipomas, which are fatty lumps under the skin Enlarged lymph glands , usually in the armpits, neck, and groin Cyst , a closed sac in or under the skin that is lined with skin tissue and contains fluid or semisolid material Benign skin growths such as seborrheic keratoses or neurofibromas Boils , painful, red bumps usually involving an infected hair follicle Corn or callus, caused by skin thickening in response to continued pressure (for example, from shoes) and usually occurring on a toe or foot Warts , a skin virus that develops a rough, hard bump, usually appearing on a hand or foot and often with tiny black dots in the bump Moles , skin-colored, tan, or brown bumps on the skin Abscess , infected fluid trapped in a closed space from which it cannot escape Cancer  of the skin (colored or pigmented spot that bleeds easily, changes size or shape, or crusts and does not heal)  Home Care 
 
 Skin lumps from an injury can be treated with rest, ice, compression, and elevation. Most other lumps should be looked at by your health care provider before you try any home treatments. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if there is any unexplained lump or swelling. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, including: Where is the lump? When did you first notice it? Is it painful or growing larger? Is it bleeding or draining? Is there more than one lump? Is it painful? What does the lump look like? What other symptoms do you have?  Your provider may prescribe antibiotics if you have an infection. If cancer is suspected or the provider cannot make a diagnosis by looking at the lump, a  biopsy  may be done. Images 
 
 
 Warts, multiple - on hands 
 Lipoma - arm 
 Warts, flat on the cheek and neck 
 Wart (verruca) with a cutaneous horn on the toe 
 Skin lumps 
 References 
 
 James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Dermal and subcutaneous tumors. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Benign 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia