
 Skin blushing/flushing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Skin blushing or flushing is a sudden reddening of the face, neck, or upper chest. Causes 
 
 Blushing is a normal body response that may occur when you are embarrassed, angry, excited, or experiencing another strong emotion. Flushing of the face may be associated with certain medical conditions, such as: High fever Menopause Rosacea Carcinoid syndrome Other causes include: Alcohol use Certain medicines used to treat diabetes and high cholesterol Exercise Extreme emotions Hot or spicy foods Rapid changes in temperature or heat exposure  Home Care 
 
 Try to avoid the things that cause your blushing. For example, you may need to avoid hot drinks, spicy foods, extreme temperatures, or bright sunlight. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have persistent flushing, particularly if you have other symptoms (such as diarrhea). What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam and may ask about your medical history and symptoms, including: Does the flushing affect the whole body or just the face? Do you have hot flashes? How often do you have flushing or blushing? Are episodes getting worse or more frequent? Is it worse after you drink alcohol? What other symptoms do you have? For example, do you have  diarrhea ,  wheezing ,  hives , or  difficulty breathing ? Does it happen when you eat certain foods or exercise? Treatment depends on the cause of your blushing or flushing. Your provider may recommend that you avoid things that trigger the condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Blushing; Flushing; Red face Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Stechschulte SA, McCall CO, Wilkin JK. Flushing. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 81. 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia