
 Skull x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A skull  x-ray  is a picture of the bones surrounding the brain, including the facial bones, the nose, and the sinuses.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 You lie on the x-ray table or sit in a chair. Your head may be placed in different positions. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the health care provider if you are pregnant or think you are pregnant. Remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is little or no discomfort during an x-ray. If there is a  head injury , positioning the head may be uncomfortable. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your doctor may order this x-ray if you have injured your skull. You may also have this x-ray if you have symptoms or signs of a structural problem inside the skull, such as a tumor or bleeding. A skull x-ray is also used to evaluate an unusually shaped child's head. Other conditions for which the test may be performed include: Teeth are not aligned properly ( malocclusion of teeth ) Infection of the mastoid bone ( mastoiditis ) Occupational hearing loss Middle ear infection ( otitis media ) Abnormal bone growth in the middle ear that causes hearing loss ( otosclerosis ) Pituitary tumor Sinus infection ( sinusitis )  Sometimes skull x-rays are used to screen for foreign bodies that may interfere with other tests, such as an  MRI scan . A CT scan of the head is usually preferred to a skull x-ray to evaluate most head injuries or brain disorders. Skull x-rays are rarely used as the main test to diagnose such conditions.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to: Fracture Tumor Breakdown ( erosion ) or calcium loss of the bone Movement of the soft tissues inside the skull  A skull x-ray may detect  increased intracranial pressure  and unusual skull structures that are present at birth (congenital). Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks associated with x-rays. Alternative Names 
 
 X-ray - head; X-ray - skull; Skull radiography; Head x-ray Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Skull of an adult 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Radiography of skull, chest, and cervical spine - diagnostic. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:953-954. Magee DJ. Head and face. In: Magee DJ, ed.  Orthopedic Physical Assessment . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 2. Mettler FA Jr. Head and soft tissues of the face and neck. In: Mettler FA, ed.  Essentials of Radiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 2. Read More 
 
 Absence seizure 
 Alzheimer disease 
 Dementia 
 Ear infection - chronic 
 Erosion 
 Friedreich ataxia 
 Hydrocephalus 
 Increased intracranial pressure 
 Malocclusion of teeth 
 Mastoiditis 
 Meningitis 
 Occupational hearing loss 
 Otosclerosis 
 Pituitary tumor 
 Sinusitis 
 Sinus x-ray 
 Vascular dementia 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Brain Diseases 
 Brain Malformations 
 Brain Tumors 
 Concussion 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Head Injuries 
 Traumatic Brain Injury 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia