
 Sleeping sickness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sleeping sickness is an infection caused by germs carried by certain flies. It results in swelling of the brain. Causes 
 
 Sleeping sickness is caused by Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense  and  Trypanosomoa brucei gambiense .  T. b. rhodesiense  causes the more severe form of the illness. Tsetse flies carry the infection. When an infected fly bites you, the infection spreads through your blood. Risk factors include living in parts of Africa where the disease is found and being bitten by tsetse flies. The disease does not occur in the United States, but travelers who have visited or lived in Africa can be infected. Symptoms 
 
 General symptoms include: Anxiety Mood changes Fever Headache Weakness Insomnia at night Sleepiness during the day (may be uncontrollable) Sweating Swollen lymph nodes  all over the body Swollen, red, painful  nodule  at site of the fly bite  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may show inflammation of the brain and its covering. Tests include the following: Blood smear Cerebrospinal fluid tests  (fluid from your spinal cord) Complete blood count  (CBC) Lymph node  aspiration Most antibody and antigen tests are not helpful because they cannot tell the difference between current and past infections. Specific levels of antibodies called IgM in the cerebrospinal fluid may be more helpful. Treatment 
 
 Medicines used to treat this disorder include: Eflornithine (for  T. b. gambiense  only) Melarsoprol Pentamidine (for  T. b. gambiense  only) Suramin (Antrypol)  Some people may receive a combination of these medicines. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, death can occur within 6 months from  cardiac failure  or from  T. b. rhodesiense  infection itself.  T. b. gambiense  infection causes sleeping sickness disease and gets worse quickly, often over a few weeks. The disease needs to be treated immediately. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications include: Injury related to falling asleep while driving or during other activities Gradual damage to the nervous system Uncontrollable sleep as the disease gets worse Coma  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 See your health care provider right away if you have symptoms. It is important to begin treatment as soon as possible. Prevention 
 
 Pentamidine injections protect against  T. b. gambiense,  but not against  T. b. rhodesiense . Because this medicine is toxic, using it for prevention is not recommended. Insect control measures can help prevent the spread of sleeping sickness in high-risk areas. Alternative Names 
 
 Human African trypanosomiasis References 
 
 Kirchoff LV. Agents of African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 279. Petri Jr WA. African sleeping sickness. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 354. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Central nervous system 
 Chagas disease 
 Drowsiness 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Myocarditis 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia