
 Smashed fingers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Smashed fingers is an injury involving trauma to one or more fingers. Considerations 
 
 If an injury to a finger occurs at the tip and does not involve the joint or nail bed, you may not need the help of a health care provider. If the tip of your finger bone is broken, your provider may not recommend a splint. If the injury is more toward the palm or involves the joint, seek medical help right away. Causes 
 
 Finger(s) can be smashed by a hammer blow, car door, desk drawer, baseball, or some other force. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Difficulty moving the tip of the finger Discoloration or bruising of the finger or fingernail Finger pain Loss of fingernail Swelling First Aid 
 
 Apply an ice pack to decrease swelling. Over-the-counter pain medicines may help relieve discomfort. If pain becomes severe, with blood under the fingernail, call your provider. Your provider may guide you in taking measures to relieve the pressure and prevent the fingernail from falling off. DO NOT 
 
 Do not splint a smashed finger without first consulting your provider. Do not drain blood from under the fingernail unless your provider instructs you to do so. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Seek medical attention right away if the finger is bent and you can't straighten it, or if the injury involves more than the tip of the finger. Prevention 
 
 Teach safety to young children. Use caution when shutting doors to make sure fingers are not in danger. Alternative Names 
 
 Finger(s) - smashed; Crushed digits Images 
 
 
 Smashed fingers 
 References 
 
 Brunton LM, Graham TJ, Atkinson RE. Hand injuries. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 77. Nelson SW, Gibbs MA. Hand and wrist injuries. In: Adam JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 89. 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Finger Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia