
 Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate is an exam of fluid from the  duodenum  to check for signs of an infection (such as  giardia  or  strongyloides ). Rarely, this test is also done in a newborn to check for biliary atresia.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sample is taken during a procedure called an  esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) . How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not eat or drink anything for 12 hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You may feel like you have to gag as the tube is passed, but the procedure is most often not painful. You can get medicines to help you relax and be free of pain. If you get anesthesia, you cannot drive for the rest of the day. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to look for infection of the small bowel. However, it is not often needed. In most cases, this test is only done when a diagnosis cannot be made with other tests.  Normal Results 
 
 There should be no disease-causing organisms in the duodenum. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The results may show the presence of giardia protozoa, the intestinal parasite strongyloides, or another infectious organism. Risks 
 
 The risks of this test include: Bleeding  Perforation of (poking a hole in) the gastrointestinal tract by the scope Infection Some people may not be able to have this test because of other medical conditions.  Considerations 
 
 Other tests that are less invasive can often find the source of the infection. Alternative Names 
 
 Duodenal aspirated fluid smear Images 
 
 
 Duodenum tissue smear 
 References 
 
 Beavis KG, Charnot-Katsikas A. Specimen collection and handling for diagnosis of infectious diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 64. Dupont HL. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 283. Fritsche TR, Pritt BS. Medical parasitology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 63. Gerding DN, Johnson S. Clostridial infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 296. 
  Gerding DN, Young VB.  Clostridium difficle  infection. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 245. Haines CF, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 110. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Siddiqi HA, Salwen MJ, Shaikh MF, Bowne WB. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 22. Read More 
 
 String test 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia