
 Smoking - tips on how to quit 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 There are many ways to quit smoking. There are also  resources  to help you. Family members, friends, and co-workers may be supportive. But to be successful, you must really want to quit. Most people who have quit smoking were unsuccessful at least once in the past. Try not to view past attempts to quit as failures. See them as learning experiences. It is hard to stop smoking or using smokeless tobacco, but anyone can do it. Know what symptoms to expect when you stop smoking. These are called withdrawal symptoms. Common symptoms include: An intense craving for nicotine Anxiety, tension, restlessness, frustration, or impatience Difficulty concentrating Drowsiness or trouble sleeping Headaches Increased appetite and weight gain Irritability or depression  How bad your symptoms are depends on how long you smoked. The number of cigarettes you smoked each day also plays a role. FEEL READY TO QUIT? First, set a quit date. That is the day you will quit completely. Before your quit date, you may begin reducing your cigarette use. Remember, there is no safe level of cigarette smoking.  List the reasons why you want to quit. Include both short- and long-term benefits. Identify the times you are most likely to smoke. For example, do you tend to smoke when feeling stressed or down? When out at night with friends? While drinking coffee or alcohol? When bored? While driving? Right after a meal or sex? During a work break? While watching TV or playing cards? When you are with other smokers? Let your friends, family, and co-workers know of your plan to stop smoking. Tell them your quit date. It can be helpful if they know what you are going through, especially when you are grumpy. Get rid of all your cigarettes just before the quit date. Clean anything that smells of smoke, such as clothes and furniture. MAKE A PLAN Plan what you will do instead of smoking at those times when you are most likely to smoke. Be as specific as possible. For example, if in the past you smoked when drinking a cup of coffee, drink tea instead. Tea may not trigger the desire for a cigarette. Or, when you feel stressed, take a walk instead of smoking a cigarette. Get rid of cigarettes in the car. Put pretzels there instead.  Find activities that focus your hands and mind, but make sure they are not taxing or fattening. Computer games, solitaire, knitting, sewing, and crossword puzzles may help. If you normally smoke after eating, find other ways to end a meal. Eat a piece of fruit. Get up and make a phone call. Take a walk (a good distraction that also burns calories). CHANGE YOUR LIFESTYLE Make other  changes in your lifestyle . Change your daily schedule and habits. Eat at different times, or eat several small meals instead of three large ones. Sit in a different chair or even a different room. Satisfy your oral habits in other ways. Eat celery or another low-calorie snack. Chew sugarless gum. Suck on a cinnamon stick. Pretend-smoke with a straw. Get more exercise. Take walks or ride a bike. Exercise helps relieve the urge to smoke. SET SOME GOALS Set short-term quitting goals and reward yourself when you meet them. Every day, put the money you normally spend on cigarettes in a jar. Later, spend that money on something you like. Try not to think about all the days ahead you will need to avoid smoking. Take it one day at a time. Just one puff or one cigarette will make your desire for cigarettes even stronger. However, it is normal to make mistakes. So even if you have one cigarette, you do not need to take the next one. OTHER TIPS Enroll in a  stop smoking support program . Hospitals, health departments, community centers, and work sites often offer programs. Learn about self-hypnosis or other techniques. Ask your health care provider about  medicines that can help you quit nicotine and tobacco  and keep you from starting again. These include nicotine patches, gum, lozenges, and sprays. The American Cancer Society's website,  The Great American Smokeout  is a good resource. The website  Smokefree.gov  also provides information and resources for smokers. Calling 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) will direct you to a free telephone counseling program in your state. Above all, do not get discouraged if you are not able to quit smoking the first time. Nicotine addiction is a hard habit to break. Try something different next time. Develop new strategies, and try again. For many people, it takes several attempts to finally kick the habit. Alternative Names 
 
 Cigarettes - tips on how to quit; Smoking cessation - tips on how to quit; Smokeless tobacco - tips on how to quit; Tobacco cessation - tips; Nicotine cessation - tips Images 
 
 
 Quitting smoking 
 Smoking hazards 
 References 
 
 Benowitz NL, Brunetta PG. Smoking hazards and cessation. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 46. Rakel RE, Houston T. Nicotine addiction. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 49. US Preventive Services Task Force. Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant women: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2015;163(8):622-634. PMID: 26389730  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26389730 . Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open 
 Angioplasty and stent placement -- peripheral arteries 
 Carotid artery surgery 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge  
 Angina - discharge 
 Angina - what to ask your doctor  
 Angioplasty and stent - heart - discharge  
 Angioplasty and stent placement - carotid artery - discharge  
 Angioplasty and stent placement - peripheral arteries - discharge  
 Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge 
 Brain aneurysm repair - discharge 
 Carotid artery surgery - discharge 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - adults - discharge 
 Controlling your high blood pressure 
 Deep vein thrombosis - discharge 
 Diabetes - preventing heart attack and stroke 
 Esophagectomy - discharge  
 Foot amputation - discharge 
 Heart attack - discharge 
 Heart attack - what to ask your doctor 
 Heart bypass surgery - discharge 
 Heart bypass surgery - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Heart disease - risk factors 
 Heart failure - discharge 
 Heart valve surgery - discharge  
 Leg amputation - discharge 
 Lung surgery - discharge  
 Peripheral artery bypass - leg - discharge  
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Stroke - discharge  
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Internal review and update on 09/01/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Quitting Smoking 
 Browse the Encyclopedia