
 Sneezing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sneeze is a sudden, forceful, uncontrolled burst of air through the nose and mouth. Causes 
 
 Sneezing is caused by irritation to the mucous membranes of the nose or throat. It can be very bothersome, but is rarely a sign of a serious problem. Sneezing can be due to: Allergy to pollen, mold, dander, dust ( hay fever ) Breathing in corticosteroids (from certain nose sprays) Common cold  or  the flu 
   Drug withdrawal
    Triggers such as dust, air pollution, dry air, spicy foods, strong emotions, certain medicines, and powders  Home Care 
 
 Avoiding exposure to the  allergen  is the best way to control sneezing caused by allergies. An allergen is something that causes an allergic reaction. Tips to reduce your exposure:  Change furnace filters Remove pets from the home to get rid of animal dander Use air filters to reduce pollen in the air Wash linens in hot water (at least 130°F or 54°C) to kill dust mites  In some cases, you may need to move out of a home with a mold spore problem. Sneezing that is not due to an allergy will disappear when the illness that is causing it is cured or treated. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if sneezing is affecting your life and home remedies do not work. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and look at your nose and throat. You'll be asked about your medical history and symptoms. Questions may include when the sneezing started, whether you have other symptoms, or if you have allergies. In some cases,  allergy testing  may be needed to find the cause. Your provider will suggest treatments and lifestyle changes for  hay fever symptoms . Alternative Names 
 
 Sternutation; Allergy - sneezing; Hay fever - sneezing; Flu - sneezing; Cold - sneezing; Dust - sneezing Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 References 
 
 Eccles R. The nose and control of nasal airflow. In: Adkinson NF Jr., Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al, eds.  Middleton's Allergy Principles and Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 40. Rutter P. Respiratory system. In: Rutter P, ed.  Community Pharmacy: Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2013:chap 1. Seller RH, Symons AB. Colds, flu, and stuffy nose. In: Seller RH, Symons AB, eds.  Differential Diagnosis of Common Complaints . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 7. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Review Date 5/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Common Cold 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia