
 Sodium hypochlorite poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sodium hypochlorite is a chemical commonly found in bleach, water purifiers, and cleaning products. Swallowing sodium hypochlorite can lead to poisoning. Breathing sodium hypochlorite fumes may also cause poisoning, especially if the product is mixed with ammonia. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Sodium hypochlorite Where Found 
 
 Sodium hypochlorite is found in: Chemical used to add chlorine to swimming pools Disinfectants Some bleaching solutions Water purifiers  Note: This list may not be all inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Watered-down (diluted) sodium hypochlorite generally causes only mild stomach irritation. Swallowing larger amounts can cause more serious symptoms. Industrial-strength bleach contains much higher concentrations of sodium hypochlorite, which may cause severe injury. NEVER mix ammonia with sodium hypochlorite (bleach or bleach-containing products). This common household error produces a toxic gas that can cause choking and serious breathing problems.  Symptoms of sodium hypochlorite poisoning may include: Burning, red eyes Chest pain Coma Coughing (from the fumes) Delirium Gagging sensation Low blood pressure Pain in the mouth or throat Possible burns on the esophagus Skin irritation of the exposed area, burns, or blistering Shock Slow heartbeat Stomach or abdominal pain Vomiting  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move him or her to fresh air.  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The person will be admitted to a hospital. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate.  The person may receive: Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Camera down the throat (endoscopy) to see burns in the esophagus and stomach Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (IV) Medicines to treat symptoms  Note: Activated charcoal does not effectively treat (adsorb) sodium hypochlorite. For skin exposure, treatment may include: Irrigation (washing of the skin), possibly every few hours for several days Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement) Transfer to a hospital that specializes in burn care  The person may need to be admitted to a hospital to continue treatment. Surgery may be needed if the esophagus, stomach, or intestine have holes (perforations) from the acid. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Swallowing, smelling, or touching household bleach will likely not cause any significant problems. However, more severe problems can occur with industrial-strength bleach, or from mixing bleach with ammonia. How well a person does depends on how rapidly the sodium hypochlorite was diluted and neutralized. There is a good chance of recovery if proper treatment is given soon after the poison was swallowed. Without prompt treatment, extensive damage to the mouth, throat, eyes, lungs, esophagus, nose, and stomach are possible, depending on how exposure occurred. Alternative Names 
 
 Bleach; Clorox; Carrel-Dakin solution References 
 
 Agabiti N, Ancona C, Forastiere F, et al. Short term respiratory effects of acute exposure to chlorine due to a swimming pool accident.  Occup Environ Med . 2001 Jun;58(6):399-404.  Lambert H, Manel J, Gabrion I. Poisoning by household products.  Rev Prat . 2000 Feb 15;50(4):365-71.  Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. 
 Review Date 1/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia