
 Spinal fusion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Spinal fusion is surgery to permanently join together two or more bones in the spine so there is no movement between them. These bones are called vertebrae. Description 
 
 You will be asleep and feel no pain (general anesthesia). The doctor will make a surgical cut (incision) to view the spine. Other surgery, such as a  diskectomy ,  laminectomy , or a  foraminotomy , is almost always done first. Spinal fusion may be done: On your back or neck over the spine. You may be lying face down. Muscles and tissue will be separated to expose the spine. On your side, if you are having surgery on your lower back. The surgeon will use tools called retractors to gently separate, hold the soft tissues and blood vessels apart, and have room to work. With a cut on the front of the neck, toward the side.  The surgeon will use a graft (such as bone) to hold (or fuse) the bones together permanently. There are several ways of fusing vertebrae together: Strips of  bone graft material  may be placed over the back part of the spine. Bone graft material may be placed between the vertebrae. Special cages may be placed between the vertebrae. These cages are packed with bone graft material.  The surgeon may get the bone graft from different places: From another part of your body (usually around your pelvic bone). This is called an autograft. Your surgeon will make a small cut over your hip and remove some bone from the back of the rim of the pelvis. From a bone bank. This is called an allograft. A synthetic bone substitute can also be used.  The vertebrae may also fixed together with rods, screws, plates, or cages. They are used to keep the vertebrae from moving until the bone grafts are fully healed. Surgery can take 3 to 4 hours. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Spinal fusion is most often done along with other surgical procedures of the spine. It may be done: With other surgical procedures for  spinal stenosis , such as foraminotomy or laminectomy 
  After diskectomy in the neck  Spinal fusion may be done if you have: Injury or fractures to the bones in the spine Weak or unstable spine caused by infections or tumors Spondylolisthesis , a condition in which one vertebrae slips forward on top of another Abnormal curvatures, such as those from  scoliosis  or  kyphosis Arthritis in the spine, such as spinal stenosis You and your doctor can decide when you need to have surgery. Risks 
 
 Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general include: 
   Reactions to medicines,  breathing problems Bleeding,  blood clots , infection Risks for this surgery include: Infection in the wound or vertebral bones Damage to a spinal nerve, causing weakness, pain, loss of sensation, problems with your bowels or bladder The vertebrae above and below the fusion are more likely to wear away, leading to more problems later  Before the Procedure 
 
 Tell your doctor or nurse what medicines you are taking. These include medicines, herbs, and supplements you bought without a prescription. During the days before the surgery: Prepare your home for when you leave the hospital. If you are a smoker, you need to  stop . People who have spinal fusion and continue to smoke may not heal as well. Ask your doctor or nurse for help. Two weeks before surgery, your doctor or nurse may ask you to stop taking medicines that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and other drugs like these. If you have  diabetes , heart disease, or other medical problems, your surgeon will ask you to see your regular doctor. Talk with your doctor if you have been drinking a lot of alcohol. Ask your doctor which medicines you should still take on the day of the surgery. Let your surgeon know about any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illnesses you may have.  On the day of the surgery: Follow instructions about not drinking or eating anything before the procedure. Take the medicines your doctor told you to take with a small sip of water. Arrive at the hospital on time.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will stay in the hospital for 3 to 4 days after surgery. You will receive pain medicines in the hospital. You may take pain medicine by mouth or have a shot or an intravenous line (IV). You may have a pump that allows you to control how much pain medicine you get. You will be taught how to move properly and how to sit, stand, and walk. You will be told to use a "log-rolling" technique when getting out of bed. This means that you move your entire body at once, without twisting your spine. You may not be able to eat for 2 to 3 days. You will be given nutrients through an IV. When you leave the hospital, you may need to wear a back brace or cast. Your health care provider will tell you how to  take care of yourself at home after spine surgery . Follow instructions on how to  take care of your back at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If you had  chronic back pain  before surgery, you will likely still have some pain afterward. Spinal fusion is unlikely to take away all your pain and other symptoms. It is hard for a surgeon to predict which patients will improve and how much relief surgery will provide, even when using MRI scans or other tests.  Losing weight and getting exercise increases your chances of feeling better.  Future spine problems are possible after spine surgery. After spinal fusion, the area that was fused together can no longer move. Therefore, the spinal column above and below the fusion are more likely to be stressed when the spine moves, and may have problems later on. Alternative Names 
 
 Vertebral interbody fusion; Posterior spinal fusion; Arthrodesis; Anterior spinal fusion; Spine surgery - spinal fusion; Low back pain - fusion; Herniated disk - fusion; Spinal stenosis - fusion; Laminectomy - fusion Images 
 
 
 Scoliosis 
 Spinal fusion  - series 
 References 
 
 Liu G, Wong HK. Laminectomy and fusion. In: Shen FH, Samartzis D, Fessler RG, eds.  Textbook of the Cervical Spine . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 34. Wood GW. Arthrodesis of the spine. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 39. Read More 
 
 Anterior 
 Bone graft 
 Diskectomy 
 Foraminotomy 
 Herniated disk 
 Kyphosis 
 Laminectomy 
 Low back pain - acute 
 Low back pain - chronic 
 Neck pain 
 Osteoarthritis 
 Sciatica 
 Scoliosis 
 Spinal stenosis 
 Taking care of your back at home 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bathroom safety - adults 
 Preventing falls 
 Preventing falls - what to ask your doctor  
 Spine surgery - discharge 
 Surgical wound care - open 
 Review Date 9/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Back Injuries 
 Bone Grafts 
 Herniated Disk 
 Neck Injuries and Disorders 
 Scoliosis 
 Spinal Stenosis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia