
 Spinal injury 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The spinal cord contains the nerves that carry messages between your brain and body. The cord passes through your neck and back. A  spinal cord injury  is very serious because it can cause loss of movement (paralysis) below the site of the injury. Causes 
 
 A spinal cord injury may be caused by:  Bullet or stab wound Traumatic injury to the face, neck, head, chest, or back (for example, a car accident) Diving accident Electric shock Extreme twisting of the middle of the body Landing on the head during a sports injury Fall from a great height Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of a spinal cord injury may include any of the following: Head that is in an unusual position Numbness or tingling that spreads down an arm or leg Weakness Difficulty walking Paralysis  (loss of movement) of arms or legs Loss of bladder or bowel control Shock  (pale, clammy skin; bluish lips and fingernails; acting dazed or semiconscious) Lack of alertness (unconsciousness) Stiff neck, headache, or neck pain First Aid 
 
 Never move anyone who you think may have a spinal injury, unless it is absolutely necessary. For example, if you need to get the person out of a burning car, or help them to breathe. Keep the person completely still and safe until medical help arrives. Call the local emergency number, such as 911. Hold the person's head and neck in the position in which they were found. Do not try to straighten the neck. Do not allow the neck to bend or twist. Do not allow the person to get up and walk unassisted. If the person is not alert or responding to you: Check the person's breathing and circulation. If needed, do  CPR . Do not do rescue breathing, do chest compressions only. Do not roll the person over unless the person is vomiting or choking on blood, or you need to check for breathing. If you need to roll the person over: Have someone assist you. One person should be located at the person's head; the other at the person's side. Keep the person's head, neck, and back in line while you roll him or her onto one side. DO NOT 
 
 Do not bend, twist, or lift the person's head or body.
 Do not attempt to move the person before medical help arrives unless it is absolutely necessary.
 Do not remove a football helmet or pads if a spinal injury is suspected. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your local emergency number (such as 911) if you think someone has a spinal cord injury. Do not move the person unless there is urgent danger. Prevention 
 
 The following may lower your risk of spinal injury: Wear seat belts. Do not drink and drive. Do not dive into pools, lakes, rivers, and other bodies of water, particularly if you cannot determine the depth of the water or if the water is not clear. Do not tackle or dive into a person with your head. Alternative Names 
 
 Spinal cord injury; SCI Images 
 
 
 Skeletal spine 
 Vertebra, cervical (neck) 
 Vertebra, lumbar (low back) 
 Vertebra, thoracic (mid back) 
 Vertebral column 
 Central nervous system 
 Spinal cord injury 
 Spinal anatomy 
 Two person roll - series 
 References 
 
 American Red Cross.  First Aid/CPR/AED Participant's Manual . 2nd ed. Dallas, TX: American Red Cross; 2014. Kaji AH, Newton E, Hockberger RS. Spinal injuries. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 43.  Read More 
 
 Spinal cord trauma 
 
 Review Date 4/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Dennis Ogiela, MD, orthopedic surgery and physical medicine and rehabilitation, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spinal Cord Injuries 
 Browse the Encyclopedia