
 Spinal cord abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Spinal cord abscess is the swelling and irritation (inflammation) and the collection of infected material (pus) in or around the spinal cord. Causes 
 
 A spinal cord abscess is caused by an infection inside the spine. An abscess of the spinal cord itself is very rare. A spinal abscess usually occurs as a complication of an  epidural abscess . Pus forms as a collection of: Destroyed tissue cells Fluid Live and dead bacteria and other microorganisms White blood cells  The pus is commonly covered by a lining or membrane that forms around the edges. The pus collection causes pressure on the spinal cord. The infection is usually due to bacteria. Often it is caused by a staphylococcus infection that spreads through the spine. It may be caused by  tuberculosis  in some areas of the world, but this is not as common today as it was in the past. In rare cases, the infection may be due to a fungus. The following increase your risk of a spinal cord abscess: Back injuries or trauma, including minor ones Boils  on the skin, especially on the back or scalp Complication of  lumbar puncture  or back surgery Spread of any infection through the bloodstream from another part of the body ( bacteremia ) Injecting drugs  The infection often begins in the bone ( osteomyelitis ). The bone infection may cause an epidural abscess to form. This abscess gets larger and presses on the spinal cord. The infection can spread to the cord itself. A spinal cord abscess is rare. When it does occur it can be life-threatening. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Fever and chills Loss of bladder or bowel control Loss of movement  of an area of the body below the abscess Loss of sensation  of an area of the body below the abscess Low backache, often mild but slowly gets worse, with pain moving to the hip, leg, or feet. Or, pain may spread to the shoulder, arm, or hand  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and may find the following:  Tenderness over the spine Spinal cord compression Paralysis of the lower body (paraplegia) or of the entire trunk, arms, and legs (quadriplegia) Changes in sensation below the area where the spine is affected  The amount of nerve loss depends on where the abscess is located on the spine and how much it is compressing the spinal cord. Tests that may be done include: CT  scan of the spine Draining of abscess Gram stain and culture of abscess material MRI  of the spine  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to relieve pressure on the spinal cord and cure the infection. Surgery may be done right away to relieve the pressure. It involves removing part of the spine bone and draining the abscess. Sometimes it is not possible to drain the abscess completely. Antibiotics are used to treat the infection. They are usually given through a vein (IV).  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well a person does after treatment varies. Some people recover completely. An untreated spinal cord abscess can lead to  spinal cord compression . It can cause permanent, severe paralysis and nerve loss. It may be life-threatening. If the abscess is not drained completely, it may return or cause scarring in the spinal cord. Possible Complications 
 
 The abscess can either injure the spinal cord from direct pressure. Or it can cut off the blood supply to the spinal cord. Complications may include: Infection returns Long-term (chronic) back pain Loss of bladder/bowel control Loss of sensation Male impotence Weakness, paralysis  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have symptoms of spinal cord abscess. Prevention 
 
 Thorough treatment of boils, tuberculosis, and other infections decreases the risk. Early diagnosis and treatment are important to prevent complications. Alternative Names 
 
 Abscess - spinal cord Images 
 
 
 Vertebrae 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Camillo FX. Infections of the spine. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds.  Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics . 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 43. Kim CW, Currier BL, Eismont FJ. Infections of the spine. In: Herkowita HN, Garfin SR, Eismont FJ, Bell GR, Balderston RA, eds.  Rothman-Simeone The Spine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 86.  Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Boils 
 Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) collection 
 Epidural abscess 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Sepsis 
 Spinal cord trauma 
 Swelling 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Spinal Cord Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia