
 Splenomegaly 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Splenomegaly is a larger-than-normal spleen. The spleen is an organ in the upper left part of the belly.  Considerations 
 
 The spleen is an organ that is a part of the  lymph system . The spleen filters the blood and maintains healthy red and white blood cells and platelets. Many health conditions can affect the spleen. These include: Diseases of the blood or lymph system Infections Cancer Liver disease Symptoms of splenomegaly include: 
 Hiccups
  
 Inability to eat a large meal
  
 Pain in the upper left side of the belly Causes 
 
 Splenomegaly can be caused by any of the following: Infections Liver diseases  Blood diseases  Cancer Home Care 
 
 It is important to prevent injury that might rupture your spleen. You should avoid contact sports. Your health care provider will tell you what else you need to do to take care of yourself and any medical condition. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 There are usually no symptoms from an enlarged spleen. Seek medical help right away if pain in your belly is severe or gets worse when you take a deep breath. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. The provider will feel and tap along the upper left part of your belly, especially just under the rib cage. Tests that may be done include: Abdominal x-ray, ultrasound, or CT scan Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) and tests of your liver function  Treatment depends on the cause of splenomegaly. Alternative Names 
 
 Spleen enlargement; Enlarged spleen; Spleen swelling Images 
 
 
 Splenomegaly 
 Enlarged spleen 
 References 
 
 Armitage JO, Bierman PJ. Approach to the patient with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 168. Hertzberg BS, Middleton WD. Spleen. In: Hertzberg BS, Middleton WD, eds.  Ultrasound: The Requisites . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 8. Vos PM, Barnard SA, Cooperberg PL. Benign and malignant lesions of the spleen. In: Gore RM, Levine MS, eds.  Textbook of Gastrointestinal Radiology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 105. Read More 
 
 Liver disease 
 Lymph system 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spleen Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia