
 Sputum fungal smear  
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A sputum fungal smear is a laboratory test that looks for fungus in a sputum sample.
Sputum is the material that comes up from air passages when you cough deeply. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A sputum sample is needed. You will be asked to cough deeply and spit any material that comes up from your lungs into a special container. The sample is sent to a lab and examined under a microscope.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your health care provider may order this test if you have symptoms or signs of a lung infection, especially if you have a weakened immune system due to certain medicines or diseases such as cancer or HIV/AIDS.  Normal Results 
 
 A normal (negative) result means no fungus was seen in the test sample.  Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be a sign of a fungal infection. Such infections include: Aspergillosis Blastomycosis Coccidioidomycosis Cryptococcosis Histoplasmosis Risks 
 
 There are no risks associated with a sputum fungal smear. Alternative Names 
 
 KOH test; Fungal smear - sputum; Fungal wet prep; Wet prep - fungal Images 
 
 
 Sputum test 
 References 
 
 Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Sputum, fungus - culture. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds.  Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:1038-9. Horan-Saullo JL, Alexander BD. Opportunistic mycoses. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 38. Read More 
 
 Eosinophil count - absolute 
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia 
 Valley fever 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 Lung Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia