
 Stable angina 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stable angina is  chest pain  or discomfort that most often occurs with activity or emotional stress. Angina is due to poor blood flow through the blood vessels in the heart. Causes 
 
 Your heart muscle needs a constant supply of oxygen. The coronary arteries carry blood containing oxygen to the heart. When the heart muscle has to work harder, it needs more oxygen. Symptoms of angina occur when blood supply to heart muscle is reduced. This happens when the coronary arteries are narrowed or blocked by  atherosclerosis  or by a blood clot.  The most common cause of angina is  coronary artery disease . Angina pectoris is the medical term for this type of chest pain. Stable angina is less serious than unstable angina, but it can be very painful or uncomfortable. There are many risk factors for  coronary artery disease . Some include: Diabetes High blood pressure High LDL cholesterol Low HDL cholesterol Sedentary lifestyle Smoking Advancing age Male gender  Anything that makes the heart muscle need more oxygen or reduces the amount of oxygen it receives can cause an angina attack in someone with heart disease, including: Cold weather Exercise Emotional stress Large meals  Other causes of angina include: Abnormal heart rhythms  (your heart beats very quickly or your heart rhythm is not regular) Anemia Coronary artery spasm  (also called Prinzmetal angina) Heart failure Heart valve disease Hyperthyroidism  (overactive thyroid)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of stable angina are most often predictable. This means that the same amount of exercise or activity may cause your angina to occur. Your angina should improve or go away when you stop or slow down the exercise. The most common symptom is chest pain that occurs behind the breastbone or slightly to the left of it. The pain of stable angina most often begins slowly and gets worse over the next few minutes before going away. Typically, the chest pain feels like tightness, heavy pressure, squeezing, or a crushing feeling. It may spread to the: Arm (most often the left) Back Jaw Neck Shoulder Some people say the pain feels like gas or  indigestion . Less common symptoms of angina may include: Fatigue Shortness of breath Weakness Dizziness or lightheadedness Nausea, vomiting, and sweating Palpitations Pain from stable angina: Most often comes on after activity or stress Lasts an average of 1 to 15 minutes Is relieved with rest or a medicine called nitroglycerin Angina attacks can occur at any time during the day. Most occur between 6 a.m. and noon. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and check your blood pressure. Tests that may be done include: Coronary angiography Blood cholesterol profile ECG Exercise tolerance test (stress test or treadmill test) Nuclear medicine (thallium)  stress test Stress echocardiogram Heart CT scan Treatment 
 
 Treatment for angina may include: Lifestyle changes Medicines Procedures such as coronary angiography with stent placement Coronary artery bypass surgery  If you have angina, you and your provider will  develop a daily treatment plan . This plan should include: Medicines you regularly take to prevent angina Activities that you can do and those you should avoid Medicines you should take when you have angina pain Signs that mean  your angina is getting worse When you should call the doctor or get emergency medical help  
MEDICINES
 You may need to take one or more medicines to treat blood pressure, diabetes, or high cholesterol levels. Follow your provider's directions closely to help prevent your angina from getting worse. Nitroglycerin pills or spray may be used to stop chest pain. Anti-clotting drugs such as aspirin and clopidogrel (Plavix), ticagrelor (Brilinta) or prasugrel (Effient) can help prevent blood clots from forming in your arteries, and reduce the risk of heart attack. Ask your provider if you should be taking these medicines. You may need to take more medicines to help prevent you from having angina. These include: ACE inhibitors  to lower blood pressure and protect your heart Beta-blockers to lower heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen use by the heart Calcium channel blockers to relax arteries, lower blood pressure, and reduce strain on the heart Nitrates to help prevent angina Ranolazine (Ranexa) to treat chronic angina  NEVER STOP TAKING ANY OF THESE DRUGS ON YOUR OWN.  Always talk to your provider first. Stopping these drugs suddenly can make your angina worse or cause a heart attack. This is especially true for anti-clotting drugs (aspirin, clopidogrel, ticagrelor and prasugrel). Your provider may recommend a cardiac rehabilitation program to help improve your heart's fitness. 
SURGICAL TREATMENT
 Some people will be able to control angina with medicines and not need surgery. Others will need a procedure called  angioplasty and stent placement  (also called percutaneous coronary intervention) to open blocked or narrowed arteries that supply blood to the heart. Blockages that cannot be treated with angioplasty may need  heart bypass surgery  to redirect blood flow around the narrowed or blocked blood vessels. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Stable angina most often improves when taking medicines. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get medical help right away if you have new, unexplained chest pain or pressure. If you have had angina before, call your provider. Call 911 if your angina pain: Is not better 5 minutes after you take nitroglycerin Does not go away after 3 doses of nitroglycerin Is getting worse Returns after the nitroglycerin helped at first  Call your provider if: You are having angina symptoms more often You are having angina when you are sitting (rest angina) You are feeling tired more often You are feeling faint or lightheaded Your heart is beating very slowly (less than 60 beats a minute) or very fast (more than 120 beats a minute), or it is not steady (regular) You are having trouble taking your heart medicines You have any other unusual symptoms  Get medical help right away if a person with angina loses consciousness (passes out). Prevention 
 
 A risk factor is something about you that increases your chance of getting a disease or having a certain health condition. Some risk factors for heart disease you cannot change, but some you can.  Changing the risk factors that you can control  will help you live a longer, healthier life. Alternative Names 
 
 Angina - stable; Angina - chronic; Angina pectoris; Chest pain - angina; CAD - angina; Coronary artery disease - angina; Heart disease - angina Images 
 
 
 Heart, front view 
 Stable angina 
 References 
 
 Boden WE. Angina pectoris and stable ischemic heart disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 71. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64(18):1929-1949. PMID: 25077860  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25077860 . Morrow DA, Boden WE. Stable ischemic heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 54. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65(18):1998-2038. PMID: 25840655  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25840655 . Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Angina 
 Arrhythmias 
 Chest pain 
 Coronary artery spasm 
 Coronary heart disease 
 Diabetes 
 Heart failure - overview 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 Overweight 
 Stress and your health 
 Ventricular assist device 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Angina - discharge 
 Angina - what to ask your doctor  
 Angina - when you have chest pain 
 Heart attack - what to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Angina 
 Browse the Encyclopedia