
 Stasis dermatitis and ulcers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stasis dermatitis is a change in the skin that results for the pooling of blood in the veins of the lower leg. Ulcers are open sores that can result from untreated stasis dermatitis. Causes 
 
 Venous insufficiency  is a long-term (chronic) condition in which the veins have problems sending blood from the legs back to the heart. This is due to damaged valves that are in the veins.  Some people with venous insufficiency develop stasis dermatitis. Blood pools in the veins of the lower leg. Fluid and blood cells leak out of the veins into the skin and other tissues. This may lead to itching and inflammation, which cause more skin changes. The skin may then break down to form open sores. Symptoms 
 
 You may have symptoms of venous insufficiency including: Dull aching or heaviness in the leg Pain that gets worse when you stand Swelling in the leg At first, the skin of the ankles and lower legs may look thin or tissue-like. You may slowly get brown stains on the skin. The skin may become irritated or crack if you scratch it. It may also become red or swollen, crusted, or weepy. Over time, some skin changes become permanent: Thickening and hardening of the skin on the legs and ankles (lipodermatosclerosis) A bumpy or cobblestone appearance of the skin Skin turns dark brown Skin sores (ulcers) may develop (called a venous ulcer or stasis ulcer). These most often form on the inside of the ankle. Exams and Tests 
 
 The diagnosis is primarily based on the way the skin looks. Your health care provider may order tests to examine the blood flow in your legs. Stasis dermatitis can also be related to heart problems or other conditions that cause leg swelling. Your provider may need to check your general health and order more tests. Treatment 
 
 Your provider may suggest the following to manage the venous insufficiency that causes stasis dermatitis: Use elastic or compression stockings to reduce swelling Avoid standing or sitting for long periods of time Keep your leg raised when you sit Try  varicose vein stripping  or other surgical procedures Some skin care treatments can make the problem worse. Talk with your provider before using any lotions, creams, or antibiotic ointments. Things to avoid: Topical antibiotics, such as neomycin Drying lotions, such as calamine Lanolin Benzocaine and other products meant to numb the skin Treatments your provider may suggest include: Wet dressings (use only when instructed) Topical steroid creams or ointments Oral antibiotics Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Stasis dermatitis is often a long-term ( chronic ) condition. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of stasis ulcers include: Bacterial skin infections Infection of bone Permanent scar When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop leg swelling or symptoms of stasis dermatitis. Watch for signs of infection such as: Drainage that looks like pus Open skin sores (ulcers) Pain Redness Prevention 
 
 To prevent this condition, control the causes of swelling of the leg, ankle, and foot ( peripheral edema ). Alternative Names 
 
 Venous stasis ulcers; Ulcers - venous; Venous ulcer; Venous insufficiency - stasis dermatitis; Vein - stasis dermatitis Images 
 
 
 Dermatitis, stasis on the leg 
 References 
 
 Henke PK. Venous pathology. In: Cronenwett JL, Johnston KW, eds.  Rutherford's Vascular Surgery . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Donnell TF Jr, Passman MA, Marston WA, et al. Management of venous leg ulcers: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular Surgery and the American Venous Forum.  J Vasc Surg . 2014;60(2 Suppl):3S-59S. PMID: 24974070  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24974070 . Usatine RP, Krejci-Manwaring J. Dermatology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine .  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 33. Read More 
 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Ulcers 
 Varicose veins 
 Venous insufficiency 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia