
 Steam iron cleaner poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Steam iron cleaner is a substance used to clean steam irons. Poisoning occurs when someone swallows steam iron cleaner. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The harmful chemicals in steam iron cleaner are: Chelating agents Hydroxyacetic acid Phosphoric acid Sodium hydroxide (dilute) Sulfuric acid Where Found 
 
 These are the names of some steam iron cleaners: CLR Faultless Hot Iron Cleaner Lime Away Whink Steam Iron Cleaner This list does not include all steam iron cleaner products. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of steam iron cleaner poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Severe pain in the throat Severe pain in the mouth  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting Severe  abdominal pain HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Rapid drop in blood pressure  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty due to throat swelling Burns Irritation  SKIN Burns Irritation  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the cleaner, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera placed down the throat to see burns in the food pipe (esophagus) and the stomach. Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Surgery to remove burned skin Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on how much steam iron cleaner they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Steam iron cleaner can cause extensive damage to the: Esophagus Eyes Lungs Mouth Nose Stomach Throat Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, or stomach. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection. If the cleaner gets in the eye, sores may develop in the cornea, the clear part of the eye. This can cause blindness. Alternative Names 
 
 Chelating agent poisoning; Mineral deposit remover poisoning References 
 
 Wax PM, Yarema M. Corrosives. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 98. Wax PM, Young A. Caustics. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 153. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia