
 Stereotactic radiosurgery - CyberKnife 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is a form of radiation therapy that focuses high-power energy on a small area of the body. Despite its name, radiosurgery is a treatment, not a surgical procedure. Incisions (cuts) are not made on your body. More than one system is used to perform radiosurgery. This article is about radiosurgery using CyberKnife. Description 
 
 During treatment: You won't need to be put to sleep. The treatment does not cause pain. You lie on a table that slides into a machine that delivers radiation. A robotic arm controlled by a computer moves around you. It focuses radiation exactly on the area being treated. The doctors and nurses are in another room. They can see you on cameras and hear you and talk with you on microphones. Each treatment takes about 30 minutes to 2 hours. You may receive more than one treatment session, but usually no more than 5 sessions. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 SRS targets and treats an abnormal area. This minimizes damage to nearby healthy tissue. SRS is more likely to be recommended for people who are too high risk for conventional surgery. This may be due to age or other health problems. SRS may be recommended because the area to be treated is too close to vital structures inside the body.  CyberKnife is often used to slow the growth of small, deep brain tumors that are hard to remove during conventional surgery. Tumors of the brain and nervous system that can be treated using CyberKnife include: Cancer that has spread (metastasized) to the brain from another part of the body A slow-growing tumor of the nerve that connects the ear to the brain ( acoustic neuroma ) Pituitary tumors Spinal cord tumors  Other cancers that can be treated include: Breast Kidney Liver Lung Pancreas Prostate A type of skin cancer (melanoma) that involves the eye  Other medical problems treated with CyberKnife are: Blood vessel problems such as  arteriovenous malformations Parkinson disease Severe tremors (shaking) Some types of  epilepsy Trigeminal neuralgia  (severe nerve pain of the face)  Risks 
 
 SRS may damage tissue around the area being treated. As compared to other types of radiation therapy, CyberKnife treatment is much less likely to damage nearby healthy tissue. Brain swelling may occur in people who receive treatment to the brain. Swelling usually goes away without treatment. But some people may need medicines to control this swelling. In rare cases, surgery with incisions (open surgery) is needed to treat the brain swelling caused by the radiation. Before the Procedure 
 
 Before the treatment, you will have  MRI  or  CT  scans. These images help your doctor determine the specific treatment area. The day before your procedure: Do not use any hair creams or hair spray if CyberKnife surgery involves your brain. Do not eat or drink anything after midnight unless told otherwise by your doctor. The day of your procedure: Wear comfortable clothes. Bring your regular prescription medicines with you to the hospital. Do not wear jewelry, makeup, nail polish, or a wig or hairpiece. You will be asked to remove contact lenses, eyeglasses, and dentures. You will change into a hospital gown. An intravenous (lV) line will be placed into your arm to deliver contrast material, medicines, and fluids. After the Procedure 
 
 Often, you can go home about 1 hour after the treatment. Arrange ahead of time for someone to drive you home. You can go back to your regular activities the next day if there are no complications, such as swelling. If you have complications, you may need to stay in the hospital overnight for monitoring. Follow instructions for how to  care for yourself at home . Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The effects of CyberKnife treatment may take weeks or months to be seen. Prognosis depends on the condition being treated. Your health care provider will likely monitor your progress using imaging tests such as MRI and CT scans. Alternative Names 
 
 Stereotactic radiotherapy; SRT; Stereotactic body radiotherapy; SBRT; Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy; SRS; CyberKnife; CyberKnife radiosurgery; Non-invasive neurosurgery; Brain tumor - CyberKnife; Brain cancer - CyberKnife; Brain metastases - CyberKnife; Parkinson - CyberKnife; Epilepsy - CyberKnife; Tremor - CyberKnife References 
 
 Accuray Incorporated. CyberKnife Accuray general information, treatment overview.  cyberknife.com/treatment/overview/general . Accessed March 3, 2017. Romanelli P, Morris DE, Adler JR Jr, Ewend MG. Image-guided robotic radiosurgery. In: Winn RH, ed.  Youmans Neurological Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 257. Welling DB, Spear SA, Packer MD. Stereotactic radiation treatment of benign tumors of the cranial base. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 179. Read More 
 
 Acoustic neuroma 
 Brain tumor - primary - adults 
 Cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
 Radiation therapy 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Epilepsy in children - discharge 
 Epilepsy or seizures - discharge  
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Epilepsy - what to ask your doctor - child 
 Stereotactic radiosurgery - discharge  
 Review Date 5/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Internal review and update on 08/05/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 03/03/2017. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Radiation Therapy 
 Browse the Encyclopedia