
 Stonefish sting 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stonefish are members of the family Scorpaenidae, or scorpion fish. The family also includes lionfish. These fish are very good at hiding in their surroundings. The fins of these prickly fish carry poisonous venom. This article describes the effects of a sting from this kind of fish. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual stonefish sting. If you or someone you are with is stung, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Stonefish venom is poisonous. Where Found 
 
 Poisonous stonefish and related sea animals live in tropical waters, including off the warm coasts of the United States. They are also considered prized aquarium fish, and are found worldwide in aquariums. Symptoms 
 
 A stonefish sting causes intense pain and swelling at the site of the sting. Swelling can spread to an entire arm or leg within minutes. Below are symptoms of a stonefish sting in different parts of the body. Airways and lungs Difficulty breathing  Heart and blood No heartbeat Irregular heartbeat Low blood pressure Collapse (shock)  Skin  Bleeding Severe pain at the site of the sting Whitened color of the area around the sting Change to the color of the area as oxygen decreases  Stomach and intestines Abdominal pain Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting  Nervous system Delirium Fainting Fever (from infection) Headache Muscle twitching Seizures Paralysis  Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. Contact your local emergency services. Wash the area with fresh water. Remove any debris, such as sand, at the wound site. Soak wound in the hottest water the person can tolerate for 30 to 90 minutes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Type of fish, if known  Time of the sting Location of the sting  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The wound will be soaked in a cleaning solution and any remaining debris will be removed. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. Some or all of the following procedures may be performed: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Medicine called antiserum to reverse the effect of the venom Medicine to treat symptoms X-rays Tetanus shot, if necessary  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery usually takes about 24 to 48 hours. Outcome often depends on how much poisonous venom entered the body, the location of the sting, and how soon the person received treatment. Numbness or tingling may last for several weeks after the sting. Skin breakdown is sometimes severe enough to require surgery. A puncture to the person's chest or abdomen may lead to death. References 
 
 Auerbach PS. Envenomation by aquatic vertebrates. In: Auerbach PS, ed.  Wilderness Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2011:chap 81. Otten EJ. Venomous animal injuries. In: Marx JA, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8t ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 62. 
 Review Date 7/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia