
 Stools - floating 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stools that float are most often due to poor absorption of nutrients ( malabsorption ) or too much  gas  (flatulence). Considerations 
 
 Most causes of floating stools are harmless. In most cases, floating stools will go away without treatment.  Floating stools alone are not a sign of an illness or other health problem.  Causes 
 
 Many things can cause floating stools. Most of the time, floating stools are due to what you eat. A change in your diet may cause an increase in gas. Increased gas in the stool allows it to float. Floating stools may also happen if you have a gastrointestinal infection.  Floating, greasy stools that are foul smelling may be due to severe malabsorption, especially if you are losing weight. Malabsorption means your body is not properly absorbing nutrients.  Most floating stools are not caused by an increase in the fat content of the stool. However, in some conditions, such as chronic pancreatitis, the fat content is increased. Home Care 
 
 If a change in diet has caused floating stools or other health problems, try to find which food is to blame. Avoiding this food may be helpful. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Tell your health care provider if you have changes in your stools or bowel movements. Contact your provider right away if you have bloody stools with weight loss, dizziness, and fever.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, such as: When did you first notice the floating stools? Does it happen all the time or from time to time? What is your basic diet? Does a change in your diet change your stools? Do you have other symptoms? Are the stools foul smelling? Are the stools an abnormal color (especially  pale or clay-colored stools )? A stool sample may be needed. Blood tests may be done. In most cases, however, these tests will not be needed. Treatment depends on the specific diagnosis. Alternative Names 
 
 Floating stools Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Schiller LR, Sellin JH. Diarrhea. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 16. Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 140. Read More 
 
 Gas - flatulence 
 Malabsorption 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia