
 Stools - pale or clay-colored 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stools that are pale, clay, or putty-colored may be due to problems in the biliary system. The biliary system is the drainage system of the gallbladder, liver, and pancreas. Considerations 
 
 The liver releases  bile  salts into the stool, giving it a normal brown color. You may have clay-colored stools if you have a liver infection that reduces bile production, or if the flow of bile out of the liver is blocked. Yellow skin ( jaundice ) often occurs with clay-colored stools. This may be due to the buildup of bile chemicals in the body. Causes 
 
 Possible causes for clay-colored stools include: Alcoholic hepatitis Biliary cirrhosis Cancer or noncancerous (benign) tumors of the liver, biliary system, or pancreas Cysts of the bile ducts Gallstones Some medicines  Narrowings of the bile ducts ( biliary strictures )  Sclerosing cholangitis Structural problems in the biliary system that are present from birth (congenital) Viral hepatitis There may be other causes not listed here. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if your stools are not the normal brown color. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will perform a physical exam. They will ask questions about your medical history and symptoms. Questions may include: When did the symptom first occur? Is every stool discolored? What medicines do you take? What other symptoms do you have?  Tests that may be done include: Blood tests, including tests to check liver function and for viruses that might affect the liver Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP) Imaging studies, such as an  abdominal ultrasound  or  CT scan Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Anstee QM, Jones DEJ. Liver and biliary tract disease. In: Walker BR, Colledge NR, Ralston SH, Penman ID, eds.  Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 23. Berk PD, Korenblat KM. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver tests. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 147. Lidofsky SD. Jaundice. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 21. Read More 
 
 Bile 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia