
 Stork bite 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A stork bite is a common type of birthmark seen in a newborn. It is most often temporary. The medical term for a stork bite is nevus simplex. A stork bite is also called a salmon patch. Causes 
 
 Stork bites occur in about one third of all newborns. A stork bite is due to a stretching (dilation) of certain blood vessels. It may become darker when the child cries or the temperature changes. It may fade when pressure is put on it. Symptoms 
 
 A stork bite usually looks pink and flat. A baby may be born with a stork bite. It may also appear in the first months of life. Stork bites may be found on the forehead, eyelids, nose, upper lip, or back of the neck. Exams and Tests 
 
 A health care provider can diagnose a stork bite simply by looking at it. No tests are needed. Treatment 
 
 No treatment is needed. If a stork bite lasts longer than 3 years, it may be removed with a laser to improve the person's appearance. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most stork bites on the face go away completely in about 18 months. Stork bites on the back of the neck usually do not go away. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 The health care provider should look at all birthmarks during a routine  well-baby exam .  Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention.  Alternative Names 
 
 Salmon patch; Nevus flammeus Images 
 
 
 Stork bite 
 Neonate 
 References 
 
 Enjorlras O. Vascular malformations. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 104. Habif TP. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 23. Read More 
 
 Patches 
 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birthmarks 
 Browse the Encyclopedia