
 Strabismus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Strabismus is a disorder in which both eyes do not line up in the same direction. Therefore, they do not look at the same object at the same time. The condition is more commonly known as "crossed eyes." Causes 
 
 Six different muscles surround each eye and work "as a team." This allows both eyes to focus on the same object. In someone with strabismus, these muscles do not work together. As a result, one eye looks at one object, while the other eye turns in a different direction to focus on another object. When this occurs, two different images are sent to the brain -- one from each eye. This confuses the brain. In children, the brain may learn to ignore (suppress) the image from the weaker eye. If the strabismus is not treated, the eye that the brain ignores will never see well. This loss of vision is called  amblyopia . Another name for amblyopia is "lazy eye." Sometimes lazy eye is present first, and it causes strabismus. In most children with strabismus, the cause is unknown. In more than half of these cases, the problem is present at or shortly after birth. This is called congenital strabismus. Most of the time, the problem has to do with muscle control, and not with muscle strength. Other disorders associated with strabismus in children include: Apert syndrome Cerebral palsy Congenital rubella Hemangioma  near the eye during infancy Incontinentia pigmenti  syndrome Noonan syndrome Prader-Willi syndrome Retinopathy of prematurity Retinoblastoma Traumatic brain injury Trisomy 18 Strabismus that develops in adults can be caused by: Botulism Diabetes (causes a condition known as acquired paralytic strabismus) Graves disease Guillain-Barré syndrome Injury to the eye Shellfish poisoning Stroke Traumatic brain injury Vision loss from any eye disease or injury  A family history of strabismus is a risk factor.  Farsightedness  may be a contributing factor, often in children. Any other disease that causes vision loss may also cause strabismus. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of strabismus may be present all the time, or may come and go. Symptoms can include: Crossed eyes Double vision Eyes that do not aim in the same direction Uncoordinated eye movements (eyes do not move together) Loss of vision or depth perception It is important to note that children may never be aware of double vision. This is because amblyopia can develop quickly. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a  physical exam . This exam includes a detailed examination of the eyes. The following tests will be done to determine how much the eyes are out of alignment. Corneal light reflex Cover/uncover test Retinal exam Standard ophthalmic exam Visual acuity A brain and nervous system (neurological) exam will also be done. Treatment 
 
 The first step in treating strabismus in children is to prescribe glasses, if needed. Next, amblyopia or lazy eye must be treated. A patch is placed over the better eye. This forces the weaker eye to work harder and get better vision. Your child may not like wearing a patch or eyeglasses. A patch forces the child to see through the weaker eye at first. However, it is very important to use the patch or eyeglasses as directed. Eye muscle surgery may be needed if the eyes still do not move correctly. Different muscles in the eye will be made stronger or weaker. Eye muscle repair surgery does not fix the poor vision of a lazy eye.  Muscle surgery  will fail if amblyopia has not been treated. A child may still have to wear glasses after surgery. Surgery is more often successful if done when the child is younger.  Adults with mild strabismus that comes and goes may do well with glasses. Eye muscle exercises may help keep the eyes straight. More severe forms will require surgery to straighten the eyes. If strabismus has occurred because of vision loss, the vision loss will need to be corrected before strabismus surgery can be successful. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After surgery, the eyes may look straight, but vision problems can remain. The child may still have reading problems in school. Adults may have a hard time driving. Vision may affect the ability to play sports. In most cases, the problem can be corrected if identified and treated early. Permanent  vision loss  in one eye may occur if treatment is delayed. If amblyopia is not treated by about age 11, it is likely to be permanent. About one-third of children with strabismus will develop amblyopia. Many children will get strabismus or amblyopia again. Therefore, so the child will need to be monitored closely. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Strabismus should be evaluated promptly. Call your provider or eye doctor if your child: Appears to be cross-eyed Complains of double vision Has difficulty seeing  Note: Learning and school problems can sometimes be due to a child's inability to see the blackboard or reading material. Alternative Names 
 
 Crossed eyes; Esotropia; Exotropia; Hypotropia; Hypertropia; Squint; Walleye; Misalignment of the eyes Images 
 
 
 Crossed eyes 
 Walleyes 
 References 
 
 Cibis GW, Ing M. Binocular vision. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 1, chap 5. Goldstein HP, Scott AB. Ocular motility. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Foundations of Clinical Ophthalmology 2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 2, chap 23. Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET. Poisonous plants and aquatic animals. In: Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET, eds.  Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Emerging Infectious Diseases . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 133. Olitsky SE, Hug D, Plummer LS, Stahl ED, Ariss MM, Lindquist TP. Disorders of eye movement and alignment. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 623. Parks MM. Binocular vision adaptations and maldevelopments monofixation syndrome, microstrabismus, and macrostrabismus. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology 2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 1, chap 8. Strabismus. American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus. Updated March 28, 2014.  www.aapos.org/terms/conditions/100 . Accessed September 2, 2016. Read More 
 
 Amblyopia 
 Apert syndrome 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Botulism 
 Cerebral palsy 
 Diabetes 
 Farsightedness 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Hemangioma 
 Noonan syndrome 
 Poisoning - fish and shellfish 
 Retinoblastoma 
 Retinopathy of prematurity 
 Rubella 
 Stroke 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Eye muscle repair - discharge  
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eye Movement Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia