
 Stretch marks 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stretch marks are irregular areas of skin that look like bands, stripes, or lines. Stretch marks are seen when a person grows or gains weight rapidly or has certain diseases or conditions. The medical name for stretch marks is striae. Considerations 
 
 Stretch marks can appear when there is rapid stretching of the skin. They are often seen when a woman's abdomen gets larger during pregnancy. They can be found in children who have become rapidly obese. They may also occur during the rapid growth of puberty in males and females. Striae are most commonly located on the breasts, hips, thighs, buttocks, abdomen, and flank. Stretch marks appear as parallel streaks of red, thinned, glossy skin that over time become whitish and scar-like in appearance. The stretch marks may be slightly depressed and have a different texture than normal skin. Stretch marks may also occur as a result of abnormal collagen formation, or a result of medicines or chemicals that interfere with collagen formation. They may also be associated with longtime use of cortisone compounds,  diabetes , Cushing disease, and post-pregnancy. Causes 
 
 Causes may include any of the following: Cushing syndrome Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Pregnancy Puberty Obesity Overuse of cortisone skin creams Home Care 
 
 There is no specific care for stretch marks. Marks often disappear after the cause of the skin stretching is gone.  Avoiding rapid  weight gain  helps reduce stretch marks caused by obesity. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If stretch marks appear without clear cause, such as pregnancy or rapid weight gain, call your health care provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms, including: Is this the first time that you have developed stretch marks? When did you first notice the stretch marks? What medicines have you taken? Have you used a cortisone skin cream? What other symptoms do you have?  If the stretch marks are not caused by normal physical changes, tests may be done. A retinoid cream can be prescribed and may help reduce stretch marks. Laser treatment may also help. In very rare cases, surgery may be done. Alternative Names 
 
 Striae; Striae atrophica; Striae distensae Images 
 
 
 Striae in the popliteal fossa 
 Striae on the leg 
 Stria 
 References 
 
 Emer JJ, Khorasani H. Striae. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 226. Read More 
 
 Diabetes 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pregnancy 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia