
 Stress and your health 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stress is a feeling of emotional or physical tension. It can come from any event or thought that makes you feel frustrated, angry, or nervous. Stress is your body's reaction to a challenge or demand. In short bursts, stress can be positive, such as when it helps you avoid danger or meet a deadline. But when stress lasts for a long time, it may harm your health. Considerations 
 
 Stress is a normal feeling. There are two main types of stress: Acute stress.  This is short-term stress that goes away quickly. You feel it when you slam on the brakes, have a fight with your partner, or ski down a steep slope. It helps you manage dangerous situations. It also occurs when you do something new or exciting. All people have acute stress at one time or another. Chronic stress.  This is stress that lasts for a longer period of time. You may have chronic stress if you have money problems, an unhappy marriage, or trouble at work. Any type of stress that goes on for weeks or months is chronic stress. You can become so used to chronic stress that you don't realize it is a problem. If you don't find ways to  manage stress , it may lead to health problems.  STRESS AND YOUR BODY Your body reacts to stress by releasing hormones. These hormones make your brain more alert, cause your muscles to tense, and increase your pulse. In the short term, these reactions are good because they can help you handle the situation causing stress. This is your body's way of protecting itself. When you have chronic stress, your body stays alert, even though there is no danger. Over time, this puts you at risk for health problems, including: High blood pressure Heart disease Diabetes Obesity Depression  or anxiety Skin problems, such as  acne  or  eczema Menstrual problems  If you already have a health condition, chronic stress can make it worse. SIGNS OF TOO MUCH STRESS Stress can cause many types of physical and emotional symptoms. Sometimes, you may not realize these symptoms are caused by stress. Here are some signs that stress may be affecting you: Diarrhea or constipation Forgetfulness Frequent aches and pains Headaches Lack of energy or focus Sexual problems Stiff jaw or neck Tiredness Trouble sleeping or sleeping to much Upset stomach Use of alcohol or drugs to relax Weight loss or gain  Causes 
 
 The causes of stress are different for each person. You can have stress from good challenges and as well as bad ones. Some common sources of stress include: Getting married or divorced Starting a new job  The death of a spouse or close family member Getting laid off Retiring Having a baby Money problems Moving Having a serious illness Problems at work Problems at home When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call a suicide hotline if you have thoughts of suicide. Call your health care provider if you feel overwhelmed by stress, or if it is affecting your health. Also call your provider if you notice new or unusual symptoms. Reasons you may want to seek help are: You have feelings of panic, such as dizziness, rapid breathing, or a racing heartbeat. You are unable to work or function at home or at your job. You have fears that you cannot control. You are having memories of a traumatic event.  Your provider may refer you to a mental health care provider. You can talk to this professional about your feelings, what seems to make your stress better or worse, and why you think you are having this problem. Alternative Names 
 
 Anxiety; Feeling uptight; Stress; Tension; Jitters; Apprehension Images 
 
 
 Generalized anxiety disorder 
 Stress and anxiety 
 References 
 
 Ahmed SM, Hershberger PJ, Lemkau JP. Psychosocial influences on health. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP. eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine.  9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 3. National Institute of Mental Health. Fact sheet on stress.  www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/stress/index.shtml . Accessed November 3, 2016. Vaccarino V, Bremner JD. Psychiatric and behavioral aspects of cardiovascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 86. Read More 
 
 Depression - overview 
 Generalized anxiety disorder 
 Grief 
 Headache 
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
 Phobia - simple/specific 
 Social anxiety disorder 
 Sweating 
 Tremor 
 
 Review Date 11/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anxiety 
 Stress 
 Browse the Encyclopedia