
 Streptococcal screen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A streptococcal screen is a test to detect group A streptococcus. This bacteria is the most common cause of  strep throat . How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test requires a throat swab. The swab is tested to identify group A streptococcus. It takes about 7 minutes to get the results. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 There is no special preparation. Tell your health care provider if you are taking antibiotics, or have recently taken them. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The back of your throat will be swabbed in the area of your tonsils. This may make you gag. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may recommend this test if you have signs of strep throat, which include: Fever Sore throat Tender and swollen glands at the front of your neck White or yellow spots on your tonsils  Normal Results 
 
 A negative strep screen most often means group A streptococcus is not present. It is unlikely that you have strep throat. If your provider still thinks that you may have strep throat, a  throat culture  will be done. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A positive strep screen most often means group A streptococcus is present, and confirms that you have strep throat. Sometimes, the test may be positive even if you do not have strep. This is called a false-positive result. Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 This test screens for the group A streptococcus bacteria only. It will not detect other causes of sore throat. Alternative Names 
 
 Rapid strep test Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Throat swabs 
 References 
 
 Flores AR, Caserta MT. Pharyngitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 59. Nussenbaum B, Bradford CR. Pharyngitis in adults. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 9. Shulman ST. Group A streptococcus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 183. Weber R. Pharyngitis. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:section 1. Read More 
 
 Strep throat 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Streptococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia