
 Stridor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Stridor is an abnormal, high-pitched, musical breathing sound. It is caused by a blockage in the throat or voice box (larynx). It is most often heard when taking in a breath. Considerations 
 
 Children are at higher risk of airway blockage because they have narrower airways than adults. In young children, stridor is a sign of airway blockage. It must be treated right away to prevent the airway from becoming completely closed.  The airway can be blocked by an object, swollen tissues of the throat or upper airway, or a spasm of the airway muscles or the vocal cords. Causes 
 
 Common causes of stridor include: Airway injury Allergic reaction 
   Problem breathing and a barking cough ( croup ) Diagnostic tests such as  bronchoscopy  or  laryngoscopy Epiglottitis , inflammation of the cartilage that covers the windpipe Inhaling an object such as a peanut or marble ( foreign body aspiration ) Swelling and irritation of the voice box ( laryngitis ) Neck surgery Use of a breathing tube for a long time Secretions such as phlegm (sputum) Smoke inhalation or other inhalation injury Swelling of the neck or face Swollen tonsils or adenoids (such as with  tonsillitis ) Vocal cord cancer Home Care 
 
 Follow your health care provider's advice to treat the cause of the problem. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Stridor may be a sign of an emergency. Call your provider right away if there is unexplained stridor, especially in a child. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 In an emergency, the provider will check the person's temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure, and may need to do  abdominal thrusts . A breathing tube may be needed if the person can't breathe properly. After the person is stable, the provider may ask about the person's medical history, and perform a  physical exam . This includes listening to the lungs. Parents or caregivers may be asked the following medical history questions: Is the abnormal breathing a high-pitched sound? Did the breathing problem start suddenly? Could the child have put something in their mouth? Has the child been ill recently? Is the child's neck or face swollen? Has the child been coughing or complaining of a sore throat? What other symptoms does the child have? (For example,  nasal flaring  or a bluish color to the skin, lips, or nails) Is the child using chest muscles to breathe ( intercostal retractions )? Tests that may be done include: Arterial blood gas analysis Bronchoscopy Chest CT scan Laryngoscopy  (examination of the voice box) Pulse oximetry to measure blood oxygen level X-ray of the chest  or neck  Alternative Names 
 
 Breathing sounds - abnormal; Extrathoracic airway obstruction; Wheezing - stridor References 
 
 Caro DA. Basic airway management. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 1. Hern HG. Pharynx and throat emergencies. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 29. Read More 
 
 Wheezing 
 
 Review Date 5/18/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breathing Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia