
 Strongyloidiasis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Strongyloidiasis is an infection with the roundworm  Strongyloides stercoralis (S. stercoralis). Causes 
 
 S. stercoralis  is a roundworm that is fairly common in warm, moist areas. In rare cases, it can be found as far north as Canada. People catch the infection when their skin comes in contact with soil that is contaminated with the worms. The tiny worm is barely visible to the naked eye. Young roundworms can move through a person's skin and into the bloodstream to the lungs and airways. They then move up to the throat, where they are swallowed into the stomach. From the stomach, the worms move to the small intestine, where they attach to the intestinal wall. Later, they produce eggs, which hatch into tiny larvae (immature worms) and pass out of the body. Unlike other worms, these larvae can re-enter the body through the skin around the anus, which allows an infection to grow. Areas where the worms go through the skin can become red and painful. This infection is uncommon in the United States, but it does occur in the southeastern U.S. Most cases in North America are brought by travelers who have visited or lived in South America or Africa. Some people are at risk for a severe type called strongyloidiasis hyperinfection syndrome. In this form of the condition, there are more worms and they multiply more quickly than normal. It can occur in people who have a weakened immune system. This includes people who have had an organ or blood-product transplant, and those who take steroid medicine or immune-suppressing drugs. Symptoms 
 
 Most of the time, there are no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they may include: Abdominal pain  (upper abdomen) Cough Diarrhea Rash Red hive-like areas near the anus Vomiting Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The following tests may be done: Blood antigen test for  S. stercoralis Complete blood count  with differential 
 Total  eosinophil count  in the blood (eosinophils are a type of white blood cell) Duodenal  aspiration  (removing a small amount of tissue from the first part of the small intestine) to check for  S. stercoralis Sputum culture  to check for  S. stercoralis Stool sample exam to check for  S. stercoralis Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to eliminate the worms with anti-worm medicines. Sometimes people with no symptoms are treated. This includes people who take drugs that suppress the immune system, such as those who are going to have, or have had, a transplant. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With proper treatment, the worms can be killed and full recovery is expected. Sometimes treatment needs to be repeated. Infections that are severe (hyperinfection) or that have spread to many areas of the body (disseminated infection) often have a poor outcome, especially in people with a weakened immune systems. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications include: Disseminated strongyloidiasis, especially in people with HIV or an otherwise weakened immune system Strongyloidiasis hyperinfection syndrome, also more common in people with a weakened immune system Eosinophilic pneumonia Malnutrition  due to problems absorbing nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms of strongyloidiasis. Prevention 
 
 Good personal hygiene can reduce the risk of strongyloidiasis. Public health services and sanitary facilities provide good infection control. Images 
 
 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Diemert DJ. Intestinal nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 365. Maguire JW. Intestinal nematodes (roundworms). In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolan R, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2009:chap 288. Mönkemüller K. Strongyloides stercoralis hyperinfection syndrome and disseminated disease.  Gastroenterology & Hepatology.  2011:7:766-768. Roxby AC, Gottlieb GS, Limaye1 AP. Strongyloidiasis in transplant patients.  Clin Infec Dis: Disease Society of N Am . 2009;49:1411-1423. Read More 
 
 Hookworm infection 
 Malabsorption 
 Simple pulmonary eosinophilia 
 
 Review Date 12/7/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Parasitic Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia