
 Stuffy or runny nose - children 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A stuffy or congested nose occurs when the tissues lining the nose become swollen. The swelling is due to inflamed blood vessels.  The problem may also include nasal discharge or "runny nose." If excess mucus runs down the back of your throat (postnasal drip), it may cause a cough or sore throat. Considerations 
 
 Most of the time, nasal congestion in older children and adolescents is not serious by itself, but can cause other problems.  When nasal stuffiness is just on one side, the child may have inserted something into the nose.  Nasal congestion can interfere with the ears, hearing, and speech development. Congestion that is very bad may interfere with sleep. The mucous drainage may plug up the eustachian tube between the nose and the ear, causing an  ear infection  and pain. The mucous drip may also plug the sinus passages, causing  sinus infection  and pain. Causes 
 
 A stuffy or runny nose may be caused by:  Common cold Flu Sinus infection The congestion typically goes away by itself within a week.  Congestion also can be caused by:  Hay fever or other allergies  Use of some nasal sprays or drops bought without a prescription for more than 3 days (may make nasal stuffiness worse)  Nasal polyps, sac-like growths of inflamed tissue lining the nose or sinuses Pregnancy  Vasomotor rhinitis Small objects in the nostril Home Care 
 
 Tips to help infants and younger children include:  Raise the head of your child's bed. Put a pillow underneath the head of the mattress. Or, place books or boards under the legs at the head of the bed.  Older children may drink extra fluids, but those fluids should be sugar-free.  You can try a cool-mist vaporizer, but avoid putting too much moisture in the room. Clean the vaporizer every day with bleach or Lysol.  You can also steam up the bathroom shower and bring your child in there before bed.  A nasal wash can help remove mucus from your child's nose.  You can buy a saline spray at a drugstore or make one at home. To make one, use 1 cup (240 milliliters) of warm water, 1/2 teaspoon (3 grams) of salt, and a pinch of baking soda. Use gentle saline nasal sprays 3 to 4 times per day.  If your child has allergies: Your health care provider may also prescribe nasal sprays that treat allergy symptoms. Learn how to avoid triggers that make  allergies worse . 
  Nasal sprays are not recommended for children under age 2. Don't use over-the-counter nasal sprays more often than 3 days on and 3 days off, unless told to by your provider. You can buy cough and cold medicines without a prescription. They do not seem to be effective in children.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the provider if your child has any of the following: A stuffy nose with swelling of the forehead, eyes, side of the nose, or cheek, or that occurs with blurred vision  More throat pain, or white or yellow spots on the tonsils or other parts of the throat Discharge from the nose that has a bad smell, comes from only one side, or is a color other than white or yellow Cough that lasts longer than 10 days, or produces yellow-green or gray mucus Symptoms that last more than 3 weeks  Nasal discharge with fever What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your child's provider may perform a physical exam that focuses on the ears, nose, throat, and airways.  Tests that may be done include:  Allergy tests skin and blood tests  Blood tests (such as CBC or blood differential)  Sputum culture and throat culture X-rays of the sinuses and chest x-ray CT scan of the head Alternative Names 
 
 Nose - congested; Congested nose; Runny nose; Postnasal drip; Rhinorrhea Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Runny and stuffy nose 
 References 
 
 Long SS. Respiratory tract symptom complexes. In: Long SS, Pickering LK, Prober CG, eds.  Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Milgrom H, Sicherer SH. Allergic rhinitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 143. Read More 
 
 Common cold 
 Flu 
 H1N1 influenza (Swine flu) 
 Otitis 
 Sinusitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - adult 
 Colds and the flu - what to ask your doctor - child 
 When your baby or infant has a fever 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Bethanne Black, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Allergy 
 Common Cold 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Sinusitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia