
 Sturge-Weber syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare disorder that is present at birth. A child with this condition will have a port-wine stain birthmark (usually on the face) and may have nervous system problems. Causes 
 
 

In many people, the cause of Sturge-Weber is due to a mutation of the GNAQ gene. This gene affects small blood vessels called capillaries. Problems in the capillaries cause the  port-wine stains  to form. Sturge-Weber is not thought to be passed down (inherited) through families. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Sturge-Weber syndrome include: Port-wine stain (more common on the face than the rest of the body) Seizures Paralysis  or weakness on one side Learning disabilities Glaucoma (very high fluid pressure in the eye) Exams and Tests 
 
 Glaucoma  may be one sign of the condition. Tests may include: CT scan MRI scan X-rays Treatment 
 
 Treatment is based on the person's signs and symptoms, and may include: Anticonvulsant medicines for seizures Eye drops or surgery to treat glaucoma Laser therapy  for port-wine stains Physical therapy for paralysis or weakness Possible brain surgery to prevent seizures Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Sturge-Weber syndrome is usually not life threatening. The person's quality of life depends on how well their symptoms (such as seizures) can be prevented or treated. The person will need to visit an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) at least once a year to treat glaucoma. They also will need to see a neurologist to treat seizures and other nervous system symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Abnormal blood vessel growth in the skull Continued growth of the port-wine stain Developmental delays Emotional and behavioral problems Glaucoma, which may lead to blindness Paralysis Seizures When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 The health care provider should check all birthmarks, including a port-wine stain. Seizures, vision problems, paralysis, and changes in alertness or mental state may mean the coverings of the brain are involved. These symptoms should be evaluated right away. Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis Images 
 
 
 Sturge-Weber syndrome - soles of feet 
 Sturge-Weber syndrome - legs 
 Circulatory system 
 References 
 
 Sahin M. Sturge-Weber syndrome. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 596. Read More 
 
 Blindness and vision loss 
 Glaucoma 
 Muscle function loss 
 Seizures 
 Tonometry 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birthmarks 
 Vascular Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia