
 Subareolar abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Subareolar  abscess  is an abscess, or growth, on the areolar gland. The areolar gland is located in the breast under or below the areola (colored area around the nipple). Causes 
 
 Subareolar abscess is caused by a blockage of the small glands or ducts below the skin of the areola. This blockage leads to infection of the glands. This is an uncommon problem that affects younger or middle-aged women who are not breastfeeding. Risk factors include: Diabetes Nipple piercing Smoking Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of an areolar abscess are: Swollen, tender lump beneath the areolar area Drainage and possible pus from this lump Fever General ill feeling Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a breast exam. Sometimes an  ultrasound  or other imaging test of the breast is recommended. A blood count and a culture of the abscess, if drained, may be ordered. Treatment 
 
 Subareolar abscesses are treated with antibiotics and by opening and draining the infected tissue. This can be done in a doctor's office with local numbing medicine. If the abscess returns, the affected glands should be surgically removed. The abscess can also be drained using a sterile needle. This is often done under ultrasound guidance. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outlook is good after the abscess is drained. Possible Complications 
 
 Subareolar abscess may return until the affected gland is surgically removed. Any infection in a female who is not nursing has the potential to be a rare cancer. You may need to have a biopsy or other tests if standard treatment fails. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you develop a painful lump under your nipple or areola. Alternative Names 
 
 Abscess - areolar gland; Areolar gland abscess Images 
 
 
 Normal female breast anatomy 
 References 
 
 Gollapalli V, Liao J, Dudakovic A, Sugg SL, Scott-Conner CEH, Weigel RJ. Risk factors for development and recurrence of primary breast abscesses.  J Am Coll Surg . 2010;211:41-48. PMID: 20610247  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20610247 .  Hunt KK, Green MC, Buccholz TA. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 36. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 
 Review Date 11/16/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Cynthia D. White, MD, Fellow American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Group Health Cooperative, Bellevue, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia