
 Sulindac overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sulindac is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It is used to relieve pain and swelling associated with certain types of arthritis. Sulindac overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this medicine. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. 
  Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Sulindac Where Found 
 
 Sulindac is also sold under the brand name Clinoril. Symptoms 
 
 Lungs: Slow,  labored breathing rapid breathing  (hyperventilation) Wheezing  Eyes, ears, nose, and throat:  Ringing in the ears Blurred vision Sensitivity to light  Skin:  Rash  Stomach and intestines:  Diarrhea Heartburn Nausea Stomach or abdominal pain Vomiting, sometimes bloody  Heart and blood:  Low blood pressure (shock) and weakness  Nervous system:  Agitation Coma Confusion Convulsions Dizziness Drowsiness Headache (severe) Incoherence (not understandable) Movement disorder Unsteadiness Other:  Chills  Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room  
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  In the rare, more serious case, additional treatment may be needed. Most people will be discharged from the emergency department after a period of observation. Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 Recovery is likely without complications, except in very large overdoses. Very large overdoses can be deadly. Alternative Names 
 
 Clinoril overdose References 
 
 Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011. Seger DL, Murray L. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 149.  
 Review Date 1/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia