
 Supernumerary nipples 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Supernumerary nipples are the presence of extra nipples. Considerations 
 
 Extra nipples are fairly common. They are generally unrelated to other conditions or syndromes. The extra nipples usually occur in a line below the normal nipples. They are usually not recognized as extra nipples because they tend to be small and not well-formed. Causes 
 
 Common causes of supernumerary nipples are: Variation of normal development Some rare genetic syndromes may be associated with supernumerary nipples  Home Care 
 
 Most people do not need treatment. The extra nipples do NOT develop into breasts at puberty. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Talk to your health care provider if there are extra nipples on an infant. Tell the provider if there are other symptoms. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will do a physical exam. The provider may ask questions about the person's medical history. The number and location of extra nipples will be noted. Alternative Names 
 
 Polymastia; Polythelia; Accessory nipples Images 
 
 
 Supernumerary nipple 
 Supernumerary nipples 
 References 
 
 Felsch KN, Merritt DF. Breast concerns. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.  20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 551. Patterson JW. Miscellaneous conditions. In: Patterson JW.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 19. Smith RP. Breast: accessory nipples. In: Smith RP.  Netter's Obstetrics and Gynecology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2008:chap 144. 
 Review Date 2/15/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Breast Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia