
 Sutures - ridged 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ridged sutures refer to an overlap of the bony plates of the skull in an infant, with or without early closure. Considerations 
 
 The skull of an infant or young child is made up of bony plates that allow for growth of the skull. The borders where these plates intersect are called sutures or suture lines. In an infant only a few minutes old, the pressure from delivery compresses the head. This makes the bony plates overlap at the sutures and creates a small ridge. This is normal in newborns. In the next few days the head expands and the overlapping disappears. The edges of the bony plates meet edge to edge. This is the normal position. Ridging of the suture line can also occur when the bony plates fuse together too early. When this happens, growth along that suture line stops. Premature closure generally leads to an unusually shaped skull. Premature closing of the suture running the length of the skull (sagittal suture) produces a long, narrow head. Premature closing of the suture that runs from side to side on the skull (coronal suture) leads to a short, wide head. Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Normal ridging due to overlap of bony plates after birth Congenital  craniosynostosis Crouzon's syndrome Apert syndrome Carpenter's syndrome Pfeiffer syndrome  Home Care 
 
 Home care depends on the condition causing the premature closure of sutures. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if: You notice a ridge along the suture line of your child's head. You think that your child has an abnormal head shape.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 Your provider will get a medical history and will do a  physical exam . Medical history questions might include: When did you first notice that the skull seemed to have ridges in it? What do the soft spots (fontanelles) look like? Have the fontanelles closed? At what age did they close? What other symptoms are present? How has your child been developing?  Your provider will examine the skull to see if there is ridging. If there is ridging, the child might need  x-rays  or other types of scans of the skull to show whether the sutures have closed too early. Although your provider keeps records from routine checkups, you may find it helpful to keep your own records of your child's development. Bring these records to your provider's attention if you notice anything unusual. Alternative Names 
 
 Ridged sutures Images 
 
 
 Skull of a newborn 
 References 
 
 Carlo W. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 88. 
 Review Date 2/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia