
 Sweating 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Sweating is the release of liquid from the body's sweat glands. This liquid contains salt. This process is also called perspiration. Sweating helps your body stay cool. Sweat is commonly found under the arms, on the feet, and on the palms of the hands. Watch this video about: Sweating Considerations 
 
 The amount you sweat depends on how many sweat glands you have.  A person is born with about 2 to 4 million sweat glands. The glands start to become fully active during puberty. Men's sweat glands tend to be more active. Sweating is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. This is the part of the nervous system that is not under your control. Sweating is the body's natural way of regulating temperature. Things that can make you sweat more include: Hot weather Exercise Situations that make you nervous, angry, embarrassed, or afraid  Heavy sweating may also be a symptom of  menopause . Causes 
 
 Causes may include: Alcohol Caffeine Cancer Complex regional pain syndrome Emotional or stressful situations (anxiety) Essential hyperhidrosis Exercise Fever Infection Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) Medicines, such as thyroid hormone, morphine, drugs to reduce fever, and medicines to treat mental disorders Menopause Spicy foods (known as "gustatory sweating") Warm temperatures Withdrawal from alcohol or narcotic painkillers  Home Care 
 
 After sweating a lot, you should: 
Drink plenty of fluids (water or better fluids containing electrolytes) to replace sweat.
   
Lower room temperature a little bit to prevent more sweating.
   Wash your face and body if the salt from sweat has dried on your skin.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if sweating occurs with: Chest pain Fever Rapid, pounding heartbeat Shortness of breath Weight loss  These symptoms may indicate a problem, such as  overactive thyroid  or an infection. Also call your provider if: You sweat a lot or sweating lasts for a long time or cannot be explained. Sweating occurs with or is followed by  chest pain  or pressure. You lose weight from sweating or often sweat during sleep.  Alternative Names 
 
 Perspiration Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Chelimsky T, Robertson D, Chelimsky G. Disorders of the autonomic nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Butterworth-Heinemann Elsevier; 2012:chap 77. Cheshire WB. Autonomic disorders and their management. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 418. Read More 
 
 Hyperhidrosis 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Menopause 
 Sweating - absent 
 
 Review Date 4/30/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sweat 
 Browse the Encyclopedia