
 Swelling 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Swelling is the enlargement of organs, skin, or other body parts. It is caused by a buildup of fluid in the tissues. The extra fluid can lead to a rapid increase in weight over a short period of time (days to weeks). Swelling can occur all over the body (generalized) or only in one part of the body (localized). Considerations 
 
 Slight swelling (edema) of the lower legs is common in warm summer months, especially if a person has been standing or walking a lot. General swelling, or massive edema (also called anasarca), is a common sign in people who are very sick. Although slight edema may be hard to detect, a large amount of swelling is very obvious. Edema is described as pitting or non-pitting. Pitting edema leaves a dent in the skin after you press the area with a finger for about 5 seconds. The dent will slowly fill back in. Non-pitting edema does not leave this type of dent when pressing on the swollen area. Causes 
 
 Swelling can be caused by any of the following: Acute glomerulonephritis Burns , including sunburn Chronic kidney disease Heart failure Liver failure from  cirrhosis Nephrotic syndrome Poor nutrition Pregnancy Thyroid disease Too little  albumin  in the blood (hypoalbuminemia) Too much salt or sodium Use of certain drugs, such as corticosteroids or drugs used to treat heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes Home Care 
 
 Follow your health care provider's treatment recommendations. If you have long-term swelling, ask your provider about options to prevent skin breakdown, such as:  Flotation ring Lamb's wool pad Pressure-reducing mattress  Continue with your everyday activities. When lying down, keep your arms and legs above your heart level, if possible, so the fluid can drain. DO NOT do this if you get  shortness of breath . See your provider instead. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 If you notice any unexplained swelling, contact your provider. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Except in emergency situations ( cardiac failure  or pulmonary congestion), your health care provider will take your medical history and will perform a  physical examination . You may be asked about the symptoms of your swelling. Questions may include when the swelling started, whether it is all over your body or just in one area, what you have tried at home to help the swelling.  Tests that may be done include: Albumin blood test Blood electrolyte levels Echocardiography ECG Kidney function tests Liver function tests Urinalysis X-rays Treatment may include avoiding salt, diuretics, or water pills. Your fluid intake and output should be monitored, and you should be weighed daily. Avoid alcohol if  liver disease  (cirrhosis or  hepatitis ) is causing the problem. Support hose may be recommended. Alternative Names 
 
 Edema; Anasarca Images 
 
 
 Pitting edema on the leg 
 References 
 
 Flores TM. Lower extremity pain and swelling. Paulman PM, Harrison J, Paulman A, Nasir LS, Collier DS, Bryan S, eds.  Signs and Symptoms in Family Medicine: A Literature-Based Approach . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 29. Skorecki K, Ausiello D. Disorders of sodium and water homeostasis.In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 118. Read More 
 
 Abdomen - swollen 
 Angioedema 
 Facial swelling 
 Foot, leg, and ankle swelling 
 Gums - swollen 
 Joint swelling 
 Overweight 
 Premenstrual breast changes 
 Scrotal swelling 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Drug Reactions 
 Edema 
 Browse the Encyclopedia