
 Swimming pool granuloma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A swimming pool granuloma is a long-term (chronic) skin infection. It is caused by the bacteria  Mycobacterium marinum . Causes 
 
 A swimming pool granuloma occurs when water containing  Mycobacterium marinum  bacteria enters a break in the skin. Signs of a skin infection appear about 2 to 3 weeks later. Risks include exposure to swimming pools, salt water aquariums, or ocean fish. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a reddish bump ( papule ) that slowly grows into a purplish and painful  nodule . The elbows, fingers, and back of the hands are the most common body parts affected. The knees and legs are less commonly affected. The nodules may break down and leave an open sore. Sometimes, they spread up the limb. Most often they stay a simple skin sore. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your symptoms.  Tests to diagnose swimming pool granuloma include: Skin test  to check for tuberculosis infection, which may look similar Skin biopsy  and culture X-ray or other imaging tests for infection that has spread to the joint or bone  Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are used to treat this infection. They are chosen based on the results of the culture and skin biopsy.  You may need several months of treatment with more than one antibiotic. Surgery may also be needed to remove dead tissue. This helps the wound heal. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Swimming pool granulomas can usually be cured with antibiotics. But, you may have scarring. Possible Complications 
 
 Tendon, joint, or bone infections sometimes occur. The disease may be harder to treat in patients whose immune system is not working well. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop reddish bumps on your skin that do not clear with home treatment. Prevention 
 
 Wash hands and arms thoroughly after cleaning aquariums. Or, wear rubber gloves when cleaning. Alternative Names 
 
 Aquarium granuloma; Fish tank granuloma References 
 
 Vega-Lopez F.  Mycobacterium marinum  infection. In: Magill AJ, Hill DR, Solomon T, Ryan ET.  Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Emerging Infectious Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 59.  Read More 
 
 Papule 
 Skin nodules 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Skin Infections 
 Water Safety (Recreational) 
 Browse the Encyclopedia