
 
 
 
 
 Swollen lymph nodes 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
        			Lymph nodes are present throughout your body. They are an important part of your immune system. Lymph nodes help your body recognize and fight germs, infections, and other foreign substances. The term "swollen glands" refers to enlargement of one or more lymph nodes. The medical name for swollen lymph nodes is lymphadenopathy. In a child, a node is considered enlarged if it is more than 1 centimeter (0.4 inch) wide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Considerations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watch this video about: Lymph nodes 
 
 
 Common areas where the lymph nodes can be felt (with the fingers) include: 
 
 Groin 
 Armpit 
 Neck (there is a chain of lymph nodes on either side of the front of the neck, both sides of the neck, and down each side of the back of the neck) 
 Under the jaw and chin 
 Behind the ears 
 On the back of the head 
 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infections are the most common cause of swollen lymph nodes. Infections that can cause them include: 
 
 Abscessed or  impacted tooth 
 Ear infection 
 Colds ,  flu , and other infections 
 Swelling (inflammation) of gums ( gingivitis ) 
 Mononucleosis 
 Mouth sores 
 Sexually transmitted illness (STI) 
 Tonsillitis 
 Tuberculosis 
 Skin infections 
 
 Immune or autoimmune disorders that can cause swollen lymph nodes are: 
 
 HIV 
 Rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) 
 
 Cancers that can cause swollen lymph nodes include: 
 
 Leukemia 
 Hodgkin disease 
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma . Many other cancers may also cause this problem. 
 
 Certain medicines can cause swollen lymph nodes, including: 
 
 Seizure medicines such as phenytoin 
 Typhoid  immunization 
 
 Which lymph nodes are swollen depends on the cause and the body parts involved. Swollen lymph nodes that appear suddenly and are painful are usually due to injury or infection. Slow, painless swelling may be due to cancer or a tumor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home Care 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Painful lymph nodes are generally a sign that your body is fighting an infection. The soreness usually goes away in a couple of days, without treatment. The lymph node may not return to its normal size for several weeks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your health care provider if: 
 
 Your lymph nodes do not get smaller after several weeks or they continue to get larger. 
 They are red and tender. They feel hard, irregular, or fixed in place. 
 You have fever, night sweats, or unexplained weight loss. 
 Any node in a child is larger than 1 centimeter (a little less than half inch) in diameter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Examples of questions that may be asked include: 
 
 When the swelling began 
 If the swelling came on suddenly 
 Whether any nodes are painful when pressed. 
 
 The following tests may be done: 
 
 Blood tests, including  liver function tests ,  kidney function tests , and  CBC  with  differential 
 Lymph node  biopsy 
 Chest x-ray 
 Liver-spleen scan 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the swollen nodes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swollen glands; Glands - swollen; Lymph nodes - swollen; Lymphadenopathy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Armitage JO. Approach to the patient with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 168. Tower RL, Camitta BM. Lymphadenopathy. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 490. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 1/10/2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lymphatic system 
 Infectious mononucleosis 
 Circulation of lymph 
 Lymphatic system 
 Swollen glands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Lymphatic Diseases 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Viral Infections 
 Read more       
   
 
