
 Tabes dorsalis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tabes dorsalis is a complication of untreated syphilis that involves  muscle weakness  and  abnormal sensations . Causes 
 
 Tabes dorsalis is a form of  neurosyphilis , which is a complication of late stage syphilis infection. Syphilis is a bacterial infection that is spread sexually. When  syphilis  is untreated, the bacteria damages the spinal cord and  peripheral  nervous tissue. This leads to the symptoms of tabes dorsalis. Tabes dorsalis is now very rare because syphilis is usually treated early in the disease. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of tabes dorsalis are caused by damage to the nervous system. Symptoms include any of the following: Abnormal sensations ( paresthesia ), often called "lightning pains" Problems walking such as with the legs far apart Loss of coordination and reflexes Joint damage, especially of the knees Muscle weakness Vision changes Bladder control problems Sexual function problems Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a  physical exam , focusing on the nervous system. If syphilis infection is suspected, tests may include the following: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination Head CT ,  spine CT , or  MRI  scans of the brain and spinal cord to rule out other diseases Serum VDRL  or serum  RPR  (used as a screening test for syphilis infection) If the serum VDRL or serum RPR test is positive, one of the following tests will be needed to confirm the diagnosis:  FTA-ABS MHA-TP TP-EIA TP-PA  Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to cure the infection and slow the disease. Treating the infection helps prevent new nerve damage and may reduce symptoms. Treatment does not reverse existing nerve damage. Medicines likely to be given include: Penicillin or other antibiotics for a long time to make sure the infection goes away Painkillers to control pain Symptoms of existing nervous system damage need to be treated. People who are unable to eat, dress themselves, or take care of themselves may need help. Rehabilitation, physical therapy, and occupational therapy may help with muscle weakness. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Left untreated, tabes dorsalis may lead to disability. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Blindness Paralysis  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have:  Loss of coordination Loss of muscle strength Loss of sensation Prevention 
 
 Proper treatment and follow-up of syphilis infections reduces the risk of developing tabes dorsalis. If you are sexually active,  practice safer sex  and always use a condom. All pregnant women should be screened for syphilis. Alternative Names 
 
 Locomotor ataxia; Syphilitic myelopathy; Syphilitic myeloneuropathy; Myelopathy - syphilitic; Tabetic neurosyphilis Images 
 
 
 Superficial anterior muscles 
 References 
 
 Hook EW. Syphilis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 319. Radolf JD,Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis ( Treponema pallidum ). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 239. Read More 
 
 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
 Neurosyphilis 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Peripheral 
 Walking abnormalities 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Spinal Cord Diseases 
 Syphilis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia