
 Tdap (tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis) vaccine - what you need to know 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 All content below is taken in its entirety from the CDC Tdap Vaccine Information Statement (VIS):  www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/tdap.pdf CDC review information for Tdap VIS: Page last reviewed: February 24, 2015 Page last updated: February 24, 2015 Issue date of VIS: February 24, 2015  Content source:  National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases Information 
 
 WHY GET VACCINATED? Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis are very serious diseases. Tdap vaccine can protect us from these diseases. And, Tdap vaccine given to pregnant women can protect newborn babies against pertussis. TETANUS  (Lockjaw) is rare in the United States today. It causes painful muscle tightening and stiffness, usually all over the body. It can lead to tightening of muscles in the head and neck so you can't open your mouth, swallow, or sometimes even breathe. Tetanus kills about 1 out of 10 people who are infected even after receiving the best medical care.  DIPHTHERIA  is also rare in the United States today. It can cause a thick coating to form in the back of the throat. It can lead to breathing problems, heart failure, paralysis, and death.  PERTUSSIS  (Whooping Cough) causes severe coughing spells, which can cause difficulty breathing, vomiting, and disturbed sleep. It can also lead to weight loss, incontinence, and rib fractures. Up to 2 in 100 adolescents and 5 in 100 adults with pertussis are hospitalized or have complications, which could include pneumonia or death.  These diseases are caused by bacteria. Diphtheria and pertussis are spread from person to person through secretions from coughing or sneezing. Tetanus enters the body through cuts, scratches, or wounds. Before vaccines, as many as 200,000 cases of diphtheria, 200,000 cases of pertussis, and hundreds of cases of tetanus, were reported in the United States each year. Since vaccination began, reports of cases for tetanus and diphtheria have dropped by about 99% and for pertussis by about 80%. Tdap VACCINE Tdap vaccine can protect adolescents and adults from tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis. One dose of Tdap is routinely given at age 11 or 12. People who did not get Tdap at that age should get it as soon as possible. Tdap is especially important for health care professionals and anyone having close contact with a baby younger than 12 months. Pregnant women should get a dose of Tdap during every pregnancy, to protect the newborn from pertussis. Infants are most at risk for severe, life-threatening complications from pertussis. Another vaccine, called Td, protects against tetanus and diphtheria, but not pertussis. A Td booster should be given every 10 years. Tdap may be given as one of these boosters if you have never gotten Tdap before. Tdap may also be given after a severe cut or burn to prevent tetanus infection. Your doctor or the person giving you the vaccine can give you more information. Tdap may safely be given at the same time as other vaccines. SOME PEOPLE SHOULD NOT GET THIS VACCINE A person who has ever had a life-threatening allergic reaction after a previous dose of any diphtheria, tetanus or pertussis containing vaccine, OR has a severe allergy to any part of this vaccine, should not get Tdap vaccine. Tell the person giving the vaccine about any severe allergies. Anyone who had coma or long repeated seizures within 7 days after a childhood dose of DTP or DTaP, or a previous dose of Tdap, should not get Tdap, unless a cause other than the vaccine was found. They can still get Td. Talk to your doctor if you: Have seizures or another nervous system problem Had severe pain or swelling after any vaccine containing diphtheria, tetanus or pertussis Ever had a condition called Guillain Barré Syndrome (GBS) Aren't feeling well on the day the shot is scheduled.  RISKS OF A REACTION TO THE VACCINE With any medicine, including vaccines, there is a chance of side effects. These are usually mild and go away on their own. Serious reactions are also possible but are rare.  Most people who get Tdap vaccine do not have any problems with it. Mild problems following Tdap  (Did not interfere with activities) Pain where the shot was given (about 3 in 4 adolescents or 2 in 3 adults) Redness or swelling where the shot was given (about 1 person in 5) Mild fever of at least 100.4°F (up to about 1 in 25 adolescents or 1 in 100 adults) Headache (about 3 or 4 people in 10) Tiredness (about 1 person in 3 or 4) Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach ache (up to 1 in 4 adolescents or 1 in 10 adults) Chills, sore joints (about 1 person in 10) Body aches (about 1 person in 3 or 4) Rash, swollen glands (uncommon)  Moderate problems following Tdap  (Interfered with activities, but did not require medical attention) Pain where the shot was given (up to 1 in 5 or 6) Redness or swelling where the shot was given (up to about 1 in 16 adolescents or 1 in 12 adults) Fever over 102°F (about 1 in 100 adolescents or 1 in 250 adults) Headache (about 1 in 7 adolescents or 1 in 10 adults) Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach ache (up to 1 or 3 people in 100) Swelling of the entire arm where the shot was given (up to about 1 in 500)  Severe problems following Tdap  (Unable to perform usual activities; required medical attention) Swelling, severe pain, bleeding, and redness in the arm where the shot was given (rare)  Problems that could happen after any vaccine: People sometimes faint after a medical procedure, including vaccination. Sitting or lying down for about 15 minutes can help prevent fainting, and injuries caused by a fall. Tell your doctor if you feel dizzy, or have vision changes or ringing in the ears. Some people get severe pain in the shoulder and have difficulty moving the arm where a shot was given. This happens very rarely. Any medication can cause a severe allergic reaction. Such reactions from a vaccine are very rare, estimated at fewer than 1 in a million doses, and would happen within a few minutes to a few hours after the vaccination.  As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a serious injury or death. The safety of vaccines is always being monitored. For more information, visit:  www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety . WHAT IF THERE IS A SERIOUS PROBLEM? What should I look for? Look for anything that concerns you, such as signs of a severe allergic reaction, very high fever, or unusual behavior. Signs of a severe allergic reaction can include hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, and weakness. These would usually start a few minutes to a few hours after the vaccination. What should I do? If you think it is a severe allergic reaction or other emergency that can’t wait, call 9-1-1 or get the person to the nearest hospital. Otherwise, call your doctor. Afterward, the reaction should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your doctor might file this report, or you can do it yourself through the VAERS web site at  www.vaers.hhs.gov , or by calling  1-800-822-7967 . VAERS does not give medical advice. THE NATIONAL VACCINE INJURY COMPENSATION PROGRAM The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Persons who believe they may have been injured by a vaccine can learn about the program and about filing a claim by calling  1-800-338-2382  or visiting the VICP website at  www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation . There is a time limit to file a claim for compensation. HOW CAN I LEARN MORE? Ask your doctor. He or she can give you the vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of information. Call your  local or state health department .  Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):  Call  1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO) Visit CDC's website at  www.cdc.gov/vaccines References 
 
 Vaccine information statement: Tdap vaccine (Tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Web site.  www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/tdap.pdf . Accessed April 21, 2015. 
 Review Date 2/24/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia