
 Temporal arteritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Temporal arteritisis inflammation and damage to the blood vessels that supply blood to the head, neck, upper body and arms. It is also called giant cell arteritis. Causes 
 
 Temporal arteritis affects medium-to-large arteries. It causes inflammation, swelling, tenderness, and damage to the blood vessels that supply blood to the head, neck, upper body and arms. It most commonly occurs in the arteries around the temples (temporal arteries) that branch off from the carotid artery in the neck. In some cases, the condition can occur in medium-to-large arteries in other places in the body as well. The cause of the condition is unknown. It is believed to be due in part to a faulty  immune response . The disorder has been linked to some infections and to certain genes. The problem may develop with or following another inflammatory disorder known as  polymyalgia rheumatica . Giant cell arteritis almost always occurs in people over age 50. It is most common in people of northern European descent. The condition may run in families. Symptoms 
 
 Some common symptoms of this problem are: Throbbing headache on one side of the head or the back of the head Tenderness when touching the scalp  Other symptoms may include: Fever General ill feeling Jaw pain that occurs when chewing Pain in the arm after using it Muscle aches Pain and stiffness in the neck, upper arms, shoulder, and hips Weakness, excessive tiredness  Problems with eyesight may occur, and at times may begin suddenly. These problems include: Blurred vision Double vision Reduced vision (blindness in one or both eyes)  Other symptoms may occur with this disease, including: Cough Tongue or throat pain Hearing loss Joint stiffness Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine your head.  The scalp is often sensitive to touch There may be a tender, thick artery on one side of the head, most often over one or both temples.  Blood tests may include: Hemoglobin  or  hematocrit Liver function tests Sedimentation rate  (ESR) and  C-reactive protein Blood tests alone cannot provide a diagnosis. You will need to have a  biopsy  (tissue sample) from the involved artery. You may also have other tests, including: Duplex ultrasound MRI PET scan Treatment 
 
 Getting prompt treatment can help prevent severe problems such as blindness or even stroke. Most of the time, you will receive corticosteroids such as prednisone by mouth. These medicines are often started even before a biopsy is done. You may also be told to take aspirin. Most people begin to feel better within a few days after starting treatment. However, you will need to take medicine for 1 to 2 years. The dose of corticosteroids will be cut back very slowly. Long-term treatment with corticosteroids can make bones thinner and increase your chance of a fracture. You will need to take the following steps to protect your bone strength. Avoid smoking and excess alcohol intake Take extra calcium and vitamin D (based on your health care provider's advice) Start walking or other forms of weight-bearing exercises Have your bones checked with a  bone mineral density  (BMD) test or DEXA scan Take a bisphosphonate medicine such as alendronate (Fosamax) as prescribed by your provider.  You may also need to take other medications that suppress the immune system. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people make a full recovery, but treatment may be needed for 1 to 2 years or longer. The condition may return at a later date. Damage to other blood vessels in the body such as aneurysms (ballooning of the blood vessels) may occur. This damage can lead to a stroke in the future.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: Throbbing headache that does not go away Loss of vision Other symptoms of temporal arteritis Prevention 
 
 There is no known prevention. Alternative Names 
 
 Arteritis - temporal; Cranial arteritis; Giant cell arteritis Images 
 
 
 Carotid artery anatomy 
 References 
 
 Hellmann DB. Giant cell arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and Takayasu's arteritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 88. Read More 
 
 Immune response 
 Necrosis 
 Polymyalgia rheumatica 
 Stroke 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, professor of medicine, division of rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Giant Cell Arteritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia