
 Tendinitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tendons are the fibrous structures that join muscles to bones. When these tendons become swollen or inflamed, it is called tendinitis. In many cases, tendinosis (tendon degeneration) is also present. Causes 
 
 Tendinitis can occur as a result of injury or overuse. Playing sports is a common cause. Tendinitis also can occur with aging as the tendon loses elasticity. Body-wide (systemic) diseases, such as  rheumatoid arthritis  or  diabetes , can also lead to tendinitis. Tendinitis can occur in any tendon. Commonly affected sites include the: Elbow Heel ( Achilles tendinitis ) Knee Shoulder Thumb Wrist Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of tendinitis may vary with activity or cause. Main symptoms may include: Pain and tenderness along a tendon, usually near a joint Pain at night Pain that is worse with movement or activity Stiffness in the morning Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. During the exam, the provider will look for signs of pain and tenderness when the muscle attached to the tendon is moved in certain ways. There are specific tests for specific tendons. The tendon can be inflamed, and the skin over it may be warm and red. Other tests that may be done include: Ultrasound X-ray MRI Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to relieve pain and reduce inflammation. The provider will recommend resting the affected tendon to help it recover. This may be done using a splint or a removable brace. Applying heat or cold to the affected area can help. Over-the-counter pain relievers  such as NSAIDs like aspirin or ibuprofen, can also reduce both pain and inflammation. Steroid injections into the tendon sheath can also be very useful for controlling pain. The provider may also suggest physical therapy to stretch and strengthen the muscle and tendon. This can restore the tendon's ability to function properly, improve healing, and prevent future injury. In rare cases, surgery is needed to remove the inflamed tissue from around the tendon. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms improve with treatment and rest. If the injury is caused by overuse, a change in work habits may be needed to prevent the problem from coming back. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of tendinitis may include: Long-term inflammation raises the risk for further injury, such as rupture Return of tendinitis symptoms When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if symptoms of tendinitis occur. Prevention 
 
 Tendinitis can be prevented by: Avoiding repetitive motions and overuse of the arms and legs. Keeping all your muscles strong and flexible. Doing warm up exercises at a relaxed pace before vigorous activity.  Alternative Names 
 
 Calcific tendinitis; Bicipital tendinitis Images 
 
 
 Tendon vs. ligament 
 Tendonitis 
 References 
 
 Biundo JJ. Bursitis, tendinitis, and other periarticular disorders and sports medicine. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 263. Lareau EM. Tendinitis and bursitis. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 86. Read More 
 
 Achilles tendinitis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tendinitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia