
 Tenesmus 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tenesmus is the feeling that you need to pass stools, even though your bowels are already empty. It may involve straining, pain, and cramping. Considerations 
 
 Tenesmus most often occurs with inflammatory diseases of the bowels. These diseases may be caused by an infection or other conditions. It can also occur with diseases that affect the normal movements of the intestines. These diseases are known as motility disorders. People with tenesmus may push very hard (strain) to try to empty their bowels. However, they will only pass a small amount of stool.  Causes 
 
 The condition may be caused by: Anorectal abscess Colorectal cancer  or tumors Crohn disease Infection of the colon (infectious colitis) Inflammation of the colon or rectum from radiation (radiation proctitis or colitis) Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) Movement (motility) disorder of the intestines Ulcerative colitis Home Care 
 
 Increasing the amount of fiber and fluid in your diet can help ease constipation.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Contact your health care provider if you continue to have symptoms of tenesmus that are constant or come and go. Also call if you have: Abdominal pain Blood in the stool Chills Fever Nausea Vomiting These symptoms could be a sign of a disease that might be causing the problem. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions such as: When did this problem occur? Have you had it before? What symptoms are you having? Have you eaten any raw, new, or unfamiliar foods? Have you eaten at a picnic or large gathering? Do any others in your household have similar problems? What other health problems do you have or have had in the past?  The physical exam may include a detailed abdominal exam. A rectal exam is performed in most cases. Tests that may be done include: Colonoscopy  to look at the colon and rectum Complete blood count ( CBC ) CT scan of the abdomen  (in rare cases) Proctosigmoidoscopy (an examination of the lower bowel) Stool cultures X-rays of the abdomen  Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - passing stool; Painful stools; Difficulty passing stool Images 
 
 
 Lower digestive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Camilleri M. Disorders of gastrointestinal motility. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 136. Dinning PG, Costa M, Brookes SJH. Colonic motor and sensory function and dysfunction. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.  10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 100. Lichtenstein GP. Inflammatory bowel disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 141. 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bowel Movement 
 Constipation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia