
 Testicular torsion 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Testicular torsion is the twisting of the spermatic cord, which supports the testes in the scrotum. When this occurs, blood supply is cut off to the testicles and nearby tissue in the  scrotum .  Causes 
 
 Some men are more prone to this condition because of defects in the connective tissue within the scrotum. The problem may also occur after an injury to the scrotum that results in a lot of swelling, or following heavy exercise. In some cases, there is no clear cause.  The condition is more common during the first year of life and at the beginning of adolescence (puberty). However, it may happen in older men. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Sudden severe pain in one testicle. The pain may occur without a clear reason. Swelling within one side of the scrotum ( scrotal swelling ). Nausea or vomiting. Lightheadedness . Additional symptoms that may be associated with this disease: Testicle lump Blood in the semen Testicle pulled to a higher position in scrotum than normal (high riding) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. The exam may show: You have extreme tenderness and swelling in the testicle area. The testicle on the affected side is higher. You may have a Doppler ultrasound of the testicle to check the blood flow. There will be no blood flowing through the area if you have complete torsion. Blood flow may be reduced if the cord is partly twisted.  Treatment 
 
 Most of the time, surgery is needed to correct the problem. Surgery should be done as soon as possible after symptoms begin. If it is performed within 6 hours, most testicles can be saved. During surgery, the testicle on the other side is often secured into place as well. This is because the unaffected testicle is at risk of testicular torsion in the future. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The testicle may continue to function properly if the condition is found early and treated right away. The chances that the testicle will need to be removed increase if blood flow is reduced for more than 6 hours. However, the testicle may lose its ability to function if torsion has lasted fewer than 6 hours.  Possible Complications 
 
 The testicle may shrink if blood supply is cut off for an extended time. It may need to be surgically removed. Shrinkage of the testicle may occur days to months after the torsion has been corrected. Severe infection of the testicle and scrotum is also possible if the blood flow is restricted for an extended period. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get emergency medical attention if you have symptoms of testicular torsion.  Prevention 
 
 Take steps to avoid injury to the scrotum. Many cases cannot be prevented.  Alternative Names 
 
 Torsion of the testis; Testicular ischemia; Testicular twisting Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive system 
 Testicular torsion repair - series 
 References 
 
 Ban KM, Easter JS. Selected urologic problems In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 99. Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testes and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 132. Elder JS. Disorders and anomalies of the scrotal contents. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 545.  Wampler SM, Llanes M. Common scrotal and testicular problems.  Prim Care . 2010;37:613-626. PMID: 20705202  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20705202 . Read More 
 
 Scrotum 
 Testicular torsion repair 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia