
 Testicular self-exam 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Testicular self-exam is an examination of the testicles that you do on yourself. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The testicles (also called the testes) are the male reproductive organs that produce sperm and the hormone testosterone. They are located in the scrotum under the penis.  You can do this test during or after a shower. This way, the scrotal skin is warm and relaxed. It is best to do the test while standing. Gently feel your scrotal sac to locate a testicle. Use one hand to stabilize the testicle. Use your fingers and thumb of the other hand to firmly but gently feel the testicle. Feel the entire surface. Check the other testicle in the same way.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A testicular self-exam is done to check for  testicular cancer . Testicles have blood vessels and other structures that can make the exam confusing. If you notice any lumps or changes in a testicle, contact your health care provider right away. Your provider may recommend that you do a testicular self-exam every month if you have any of the following risk factors: Family history of testicular cancer Past testicular tumor Undescended testicle However, if a man has no risk factors or symptoms, experts do not know if doing testicular self-exam lowers the chance of dying from this cancer.  Normal Results 
 
 Each testicle should feel firm, but not rock hard. One testicle may be lower or slightly larger than the other. Talk to your provider if you have questions. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 If you find a small, hard lump (like a pea), have an enlarged testicle, or notice any other differences that do not seem normal, see your provider right away. Call your provider if: You cannot find one or both testicles. The testicles may not have descended properly in the scrotum. There is a soft collection of thin tubes above the testicle. This may be a collection of widened veins ( varicocele ). You have pain or swelling in the scrotum. This may be an infection or a fluid-filled sac ( hydrocele ) causing a blockage of blood flow to the area.  Sudden, severe (acute) pain in the scrotum or testicle that lasts for more than a few minutes is an emergency. If you have this type of pain, seek medical attention right away. A lump in the testicle is often the first sign of testicular cancer. If you find a lump, see a provider right away. Most testicular cancers are very treatable. Keep in mind that some cases of testicular cancer do not show symptoms until they reach an advanced stage. Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this self-exam. Alternative Names 
 
 Screening - testicular cancer - self-exam; Testicular cancer - screening - self-exam  Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Testicular anatomy 
 References 
 
 American Cancer Society. Testicular self-exam. Last revised January 20, 2015. Available at: www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/moreinformation/doihavetesticularcancer/do-i-have-testicular-cancer-self-exam. Accessed October 2, 2015. Friedlander TW, Ryan CJ, Small EJ, Torti F. Testicular cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2014:chap 86. National Cancer Institute: Testicular Cancer Screening (PDQ). Bethesda, MD. Date last modified: July 19, 2012. Available at: www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/screening/testicular/Patient/page3. Accessed October 2, 2015. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for testicular cancer. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2011;154:483-6. PMID: 21464350  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21464350 .  Read More 
 
 Hydrocele 
 Testes 
 Testicular cancer 
 Testosterone 
 Undescended testicle 
 Varicocele 
 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Cancer 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia