
 Testicular cancer 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Testicular cancer is cancer that starts in the testicles. The testicles are the male reproductive glands located in the scrotum. Causes 
 
 The exact cause of testicular cancer is unknown. Factors that may increase a man's risk of developing testicular cancer are: 
 Abnormal testicle development
  
 Exposure to certain chemicals
  
 Family history of testicular cancer
  HIV infection 
 History of testicular cancer
  
 History of an  undescended testicle 
 (one or both testicles fail to move into the scrotum before birth)
  Klinefelter syndrome Testicular cancer is the most common cancer in young and middle-aged men. It can also occur in older men, and in rare cases, in younger boys. White men are more likely than African American and Asian American men to develop this type of cancer. There is no link between  vasectomy  and testicular cancer. There are two main types of testicular cancer: Seminomas Nonseminomas These cancers grow from germ cells, the cells that make sperm. Seminoma: This is a slow-growing form of testicular cancer found in men in their 30s and 40s. The cancer is in the testes, but it can spread to the lymph nodes. Seminomas are very sensitive to radiation therapy. Nonseminoma: This more common type of testicular cancer tends to grow more quickly than seminomas. Nonseminoma tumors are often made up of more than one type of cell, and are identified according to these different cell types: Choriocarcinoma  (rare) Embryonal carcinoma Teratoma Yolk sac tumor A stromal tumor is a rare type of testicular tumor. They are usually not cancerous. The two main types of stromal tumors are Leydig cell tumors and Sertoli cell tumors. Stromal tumors usually occur during childhood. Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms. The cancer may look like a painless mass in the testes. If there are symptoms, they may include: 
   Discomfort or pain in the testicle, or a feeling of heaviness in the scrotum
    Pain in the back or lower abdomen Enlarged testicle or a change in the way it feels Excess amount of breast tissue ( gynecomastia ), however this can occur normally in adolescent boys who do not have testicular cancer Lump or swelling in either testicle Symptoms in other parts of the body, such as the lungs, abdomen, pelvis, back, or brain, may also occur if the cancer has spread outside the testicles. Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination typically reveals a firm lump (mass) in one of the testicles. When the health care provider holds a flashlight up to the scrotum, the light does not pass through the lump. This exam is called  transillumination . Other tests include: Abdominal and pelvic CT scan Blood tests for tumor markers: alpha fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotrophin (beta HCG), and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) Chest x-ray Ultrasound of the scrotum Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the: Type of testicular tumor Stage of the tumor Once cancer is found, the first step is to determine the type of cancer cell by examining it under a microscope. The cells can be seminoma, nonseminoma, or both. The next step is to determine how far the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. This is called "staging." Stage I cancer has not spread beyond the testicle. Stage II cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the abdomen. Stage III cancer has spread beyond the lymph nodes (it could be as far as the liver, lungs, or brain). Three types of treatment can be used. Surgical treatment removes the testicle (orchiectomy). Radiation therapy  using high-dose x-rays or other high-energy rays may be used after surgery to prevent the tumor from returning. Radiation therapy is usually only used for treating seminomas. Chemotherapy  uses drugs to kill cancer cells. This treatment has greatly improved survival for people with both seminomas and nonseminomas. Support Groups 
 
 Joining a  support group  where members share common experiences and problems can often help the stress of illness. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Testicular cancer is one of the most treatable and curable cancers. The survival rate for men with early-stage seminoma (the least aggressive type of testicular cancer) is greater than 95%. The disease-free survival rate for Stage II and III cancers is slightly lower, depending on the size of the tumor and when treatment is begun. Possible Complications 
 
 Testicular cancer may spread to other parts of the body. The most common sites include the: Abdomen Lungs Retroperitoneal area (the area near the kidneys behind the other organs in the belly area) Spine Complications of surgery can include: Bleeding and infection after surgery Infertility (if both testicles are removed) If you think you may want to have children in the future, ask your provider about methods to save your sperm for use at a later date. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of testicular cancer. Prevention 
 
 Performing a  testicular self-examination (TSE)  each month may help detect testicular cancer at an early stage, before it spreads. Finding testicular cancer early is important for successful treatment and survival. Alternative Names 
 
 Cancer - testes; Germ cell tumor; Seminoma testicular cancer; Nonseminoma testicular cancer; Testicular neoplasm Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 Male reproductive system 
 References 
 
 Friedlander TW, Ryan CJ, Small EJ, Torti F. Testicular cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 86. National Cancer Institute. PDQ testicular cancer treatment. Updated February 17, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/testicular/hp/testicular-treatment-pdq#section/_85 . Accessed July 11, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): testicular cancer. Version 2.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/testicular.pdf . Accessed July 11, 2016. 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor 
 Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor 
 Review Date 5/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia