
 Testicle lump 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A testicle lump is swelling or a growth (mass) in one or both testicles. Considerations 
 
 A testicle lump that does not hurt may be a sign of cancer. Most cases of testicular cancer occur in men ages 15 to 40. It can also occur at older or younger ages. Causes 
 
 Possible causes of a painful scrotal mass include: A cyst-like lump in the scrotum that contains fluid and dead sperm cells (spermatocele) Epididymitis Infection of the scrotal sac Injury or trauma Mumps Orchitis  (testicular infection) Testicular torsion Testicular cancer Varicocele Possible causes if the scrotal mass is not painful: Hydrocele Loop of bowel from a  hernia Spermatocele Testicular cancer Varicocele  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider right away if you notice any unexplained lumps or any other changes in your testicles. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will examine you. This may include looking at and feeling ( palpating ) the testicles and  scrotum . You will be asked questions about your health history and symptoms, such as: When did you notice the lump? Have you had any previous lumps? Do you have any pain? Does the lump change in size? Exactly where on the testicle is the lump? Is only one testicle involved? Have you had any recent injuries or infections? Have you ever had surgery on your testicles or in the area? What other symptoms do you have? Is there  scrotal swelling ? Do you have  abdominal pain  or lumps or swelling anywhere else? Were you born with both testicles in the scrotum?  Tests and treatments depend on the results of the physical exam. Prevention 
 
 Starting in puberty, men at risk for testicular cancer may be taught to do regular exams of their testicles. This includes men with: A family history of testicular cancer A past tumor of the testicle An undescended testicle, even if the testicle on the other side has descended If you have a lump in your testicle, tell your health care provider right away. A lump on the testicle may be the first sign of testicular cancer. Many men with testicular cancer have been given a wrong diagnosis. Therefore, it is important to go back to your provider if you have a lump that doesn't go away.  Alternative Names 
 
 Lump in the testicle; Scrotal mass Images 
 
 
 Male reproductive anatomy 
 References 
 
 Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testes and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 132. Elder JS. Disorders and anomalies of the scrotal contents. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 539. Stephenson AJ. Gilligan TD. Neoplasms of the testis. In:Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 31. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Testicular Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2011;154:483-6. PMID: 21464350  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21464350 .  Read More 
 
 Testicle pain 
 Testicular cancer 
 Testicular self-exam 
 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Testicular Cancer 
 Testicular Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia