
 Tetrahydrozoline poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tetrahydrozoline is a form of a medicine called imidazoline, which is found in over-the-counter eye drops and nasal sprays. Tetrahydrozoline poisoning occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally swallows this product. This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Tetrahydrozoline Where Found 
 
 Tetrahydrozoline is sold under the following brand names: Eyesine Geneye Murine Tears Plus Optigene 3 Tyzine Visine Original and Advanced Relief Note: This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Coma Difficulty breathing  or no breathing Blurred vision Blue lips and fingernails Change in pupil size Changes in blood pressure (high at first, low later) Fast heartbeat Headache Irritability Low body temperature Nausea and vomiting Nervousness Seizures Tremors (unintentional trembling)  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: The patient's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strengths if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support , including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms  Outlook (Prognosis)  
 
 Survival past 24 hours is usually a good sign that the person will recover. Alternative Names 
 
 Murine; Visine 
 Review Date 1/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Poisoning 
 Browse the Encyclopedia