
 Thoracic spine x-ray 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A thoracic spine x-ray is an x-ray of the twelve chest (thoracic) bones (vertebrae). The vertebrae are separated by flat pads of cartilage called disks that provide a cushion between the bones. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in the health care provider's office. You will lie on the x-ray table in different positions. If the x-ray is checking for an injury, care will be taken to prevent further injury. The x-ray machine will be moved over the thoracic area of the spine. You will hold your breath as the picture is taken, so that the picture will not be blurry. Usually 2 or 3 x-ray views are needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the provider if you are pregnant. Remove all jewelry. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test causes no discomfort. The table may be cold. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The x-ray helps evaluate: Bone injuries Cartilage loss Diseases of the bone Tumors of the bone  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The test can detect: Bone spurs Deformities of the spine Disk narrowing Dislocations Fractures Thinning of the bone ( osteoporosis ) Wearing away (degeneration) of the vertebrae  Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays. Considerations 
 
 The x-ray will not detect problems in the muscles, nerves, and other soft tissues, because these problems cannot be seen well on an x-ray. Alternative Names 
 
 Vertebral radiography; X-ray - spine; Thoracic x-ray; Spine x-ray; Thoracic spine films; Back films Images 
 
 
 Skeletal spine 
 Vertebra, thoracic (mid back) 
 Vertebral column 
 Intervertebral disk 
 Anterior skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Van Thielen T, van den Hauwe L, Van Goethem JW, Parizel PM. Imaging techniques and anatomy. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill-Livingstone; 2015:chap 54. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Osteoporosis - overview 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 8/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Cancer 
 Bone Diseases 
 Osteoporosis 
 Scoliosis 
 Spine Injuries and Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia