
 Thrombocytopenia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thrombocytopenia is any disorder in which there is an abnormally low amount of platelets. Platelets are parts of the blood that help blood to clot. This condition is sometimes associated with abnormal bleeding. Causes 
 
 Thrombocytopenia is often divided into 3 major causes of low platelets: Not enough platelets are made in the bone marrow Increased breakdown of platelets in the bloodstream  Increased breakdown of platelets in the spleen or liver Your bone marrow may not make enough platelets if you have any of the following conditions: Aplastic anemia Cancer in the bone marrow, such as  leukemia Cirrhosis (liver scarring) Folate  deficiency Infections in the bone marrow (very rare) Myelodysplastic syndrome (bone marrow does not make enough blood cells or makes defective cells) Vitamin B12 deficiency Use of certain drugs may also lead to a low production of platelets in the bone marrow. The most common example is chemotherapy treatment. The following health conditions cause increased breakdown of platelets: Disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become over active, most often during a serious illness ( DIC ) Drug-induced low platelet count Swollen spleen Disorder in which the immune system destroys platelets ( ITP ) Disorder that causes blood clots to form in small blood vessels, causing a low platelet count ( TTP ) Symptoms 
 
 You may not have any symptoms. Or you may have general symptoms, such as:  Bleeding in the mouth and gums Bruising Nosebleeds  Rash (pinpoint red spots called petechia) Other symptoms depend on the cause.  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The following tests may be done: Complete blood count  (CBC)  Blood clotting tests ( PTT  and  PT )  Other tests that may help diagnose this condition include bone marrow aspiration or biopsy. Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the cause of the condition. In some cases, a transfusion of platelets may be required to stop or prevent bleeding. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the disorder causing the low platelet counts. Possible Complications 
 
 Severe bleeding (hemorrhage) is the main complication. Bleeding may occur in the brain or gastrointestinal tract. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you experience unexplained bleeding or bruising. Prevention 
 
 Prevention depends on the specific cause. Alternative Names 
 
 Low platelet count - thrombocytopenia References 
 
 Abrams CS. Thrombocytopenia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 172. Arnold DM, Patriquin C, Toltl LJ, Nazi I, Smith J, Kelton J. Diseases of platelet number. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 133. Warkentin TE. Thrombocytopenia caused by platelet destruction, hypersplenism, or hemodilution. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 134. Read More 
 
 Bloody or tarry stools 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Hypersplenism 
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 
 Primary thrombocythemia 
 Thrombocytopenia - drug induced 
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
 Vomiting blood 
 
 Review Date 2/12/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia