
 Throat swab culture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A throat swab culture is a laboratory test that is done to identify germs that may cause infection in the throat. It is most often used to diagnose  strep throat . How the Test is Performed 
 
 You will be asked to tilt your head back and open your mouth wide. Your health care provider will rub a sterile cotton swab along the back of your throat near your tonsils. You will need to resist gagging and closing your mouth while the swab touches this area. Your provider may need to scrape the back of your throat with the swab several times. This helps improve the chances of detecting bacteria. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 DO NOT use antiseptic mouthwash before this test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Your throat may be sore when this test is done. You may feel like gagging when the back of your throat is touched with the swab, but the test only lasts a few seconds. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done when a throat infection is suspected, particularly strep throat. A throat culture can also help your provider determine which antibiotic will work best for you. Normal Results 
 
 A normal or negative result means no bacteria or other germs that may cause a sore throat were found. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 An abnormal or positive result means bacteria or other germs that can cause a sore throat were seen on the throat swab. Risks 
 
 This test is safe and easy to tolerate. In very few people, the sensation of gagging may lead to an urge to vomit or cough. Alternative Names 
 
 Throat culture and sensitivity; Culture - throat Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Throat swabs 
 References 
 
 Nussenbaum B, Bradford CR. Pharyngitis in adults. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 9. Shulman ST. Group A streptococcus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 183. Weber R. Pharyngitis. In: Bope ET, Kellerman RD, eds.  Conn's Current Therapy 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:section 1. Read More 
 
 Diphtheria 
 Strep throat 
 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Sore Throat 
 Streptococcal Infections 
 Throat Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia