
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a blood disorder that causes blood clots to form in small blood vessels. This leads to a low platelet count ( thrombocytopenia ). Causes 
 
 This disease may be caused by problems with an enzyme (a type of protein) that is involved in blood clotting. These changes cause clotting to occur in an abnormal way. As the platelets clump together in these clots, fewer platelets are available in the blood in other parts of the body to help with clotting. This can lead to bleeding under the skin. The blood clots prevent oxygen from reaching these parts of the body.  In some cases, the disorder is passed down through families (inherited). In these cases, people are born with naturally low levels of this enzyme. This condition also may be caused by: Cancer Chemotherapy Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation HIV infection Hormone replacement therapy and estrogens Medicines (including ticlopidine, clopidogrel, guinine, and cyclosporine A)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Bleeding into the skin  or mucus membranes Confusion  Fatigue,  weakness Fever Headache Pale skin color or yellowish skin color Shortness of breath Fast heart rate (over 100 beats per minute)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests that may be ordered include: ADAMTS 13 activity level Bilirubin Blood smear CBC Creatinine  level Lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) level Mucus membrane  biopsy Platelet count Urinalysis Von Willebrand factor assay  Treatment 
 
 You may have a treatment called plasma exchange. It removes your abnormal plasma and replaces it with normal plasma from a healthy donor. Plasma is the liquid part of blood that contains blood cells and platelets. Plasma exchange also replaces the missing enzyme. The procedure is done as follows: First, you have your blood drawn as if donating blood. As the blood is passed through a machine that separates blood into its different parts, the abnormal plasma is removed and your blood cells are saved. Your blood cells are then combined with normal plasma from a donor, and then given back to you.  This treatment is repeated daily until blood tests show improvement. People who do not respond to this treatment or whose condition often returns may need to: Have surgery to remove their spleen Get medicines that suppress the immune system, such as steroids or rituximab  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people who undergo plasma exchange recover completely. But some people die of this disease, especially if it is not diagnosed right away. In people who do not recover, this condition can become long-term (chronic). Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Kidney failure Low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) Low red blood cell count (caused by the premature breakdown of red blood cells) Nervous system problems Severe bleeding (hemorrhage) Stroke When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any unexplained bleeding. Prevention 
 
 Because the cause is unknown, there is no known way to prevent this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 TTP Images 
 
 
 Blood cells 
 References 
 
 McCrae KR, Sadler JE, Cines DB. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and the hemolytic uremic syndrome. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 136. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
 Platelet count 
 RBC count 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 2/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Rita Nanda, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia