
 Thrombocytopenia - drug induced 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Thrombocytopenia  is any disorder in which there are not enough  platelets . Platelets are cells in the blood that help the blood clot. A low platelet count makes bleeding more likely. When medicines or drugs are the causes of a low platelet count, it is called drug-induced thrombocytopenia. Causes 
 
 Drug-induced thrombocytopenia occurs when certain medicines destroy platelets or interfere with the body's ability to make enough of them. There are two types of drug-induced thrombocytopenia: immune and nonimmune. If a medicine causes your body to produce  antibodies , which seek and destroy your platelets, the condition is called drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia. Heparin, a blood thinner, is the most common cause of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia. If a medicine prevents your bone marrow from making enough platelets, the condition is called drug-induced nonimmune thrombocytopenia.  Chemotherapy  drugs and a seizure medicine called valproic acid may lead to this problem. Other medicines that cause drug-induced thrombocytopenia include: Furosemide Gold, used to treat arthritis Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Penicillin Quinidine Quinine Ranitidine Sulfonamides Linezolid and other antibiotics Symptoms 
 
 Decreased platelets may cause: Abnormal bleeding Bleeding when you brush your teeth Easy  bruising Pinpoint red spots on the skin ( petechiae ) Treatment 
 
 The first step is to stop using the medicine that is causing the problem. For people who have life-threatening bleeding, treatments may include: Immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) given through a vein Plasma exchange (plasmapheresis) Platelet transfusions Corticosteroid medicine Possible Complications 
 
 Bleeding can be life-threatening if it occurs in the brain or other organs. A pregnant woman who has antibodies to platelets may pass the antibodies to the baby in the womb. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your healthcare provider if you have unexplained bleeding or bruising. Alternative Names 
 
 Drug-induced thrombocytopenia Images 
 
 
 Blood clot formation 
 Blood clots 
 References 
 
 Abrams CS. Thrombocytopenia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 172. Warkentin TE. Thrombocytopenia caused by platelet destruction, hypersplenism, or hemodilution. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 134. Read More 
 
 Bleeding 
 Bleeding into the skin 
 Platelet count 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Platelet Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia