
 Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid is cancer of the thyroid gland that starts in cells that release a hormone called calcitonin. These cells are called "C" cells. The thyroid gland is located inside the front of your lower neck. Causes 
 
 The cause of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MTC) is unknown. MTC is very rare. It can occur in children and adults. Unlike other types of thyroid cancer, MTC is less likely to be caused by radiation therapy to the neck given to treat other cancers during childhood. There are 2 forms of MTC: 
  Sporadic MTC, which does not run in families. Most MTCs are sporadic. This form mainly affects older adults.
   
  Inherited MTC, which runs in families.
   You have an increased risk for this type of cancer if you have: 
  A family history of MTC
   
  A family history of  multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) )
   Had prior history of  pheochromocytoma , mucosal neuromas, or  hyperparathyroidism Other types of thyroid cancer include: Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid Follicular tumor of the thyroid Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid 
  Thyroid  lymphoma Symptoms 
 
 MTC often begins as a small lump (nodule) in the thyroid gland. There may also be  lymph node swelling  in the neck. As a result, symptoms may include: Problems swelling Hoarseness Breathing problems due to narrowing of airways Cough Cough with blood Diarrhea due to high calcitonin level Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history. Tests that may be used to diagnose MTC include: Calcitonin  blood test CEA  blood test Genetic testing Thyroid biopsy Ultrasound of the thyroid People with MTC should be checked for certain other tumors, especially pheochromocytoma. Treatment 
 
 Treatment involves surgery to remove the thyroid gland and surrounding lymph nodes. Because this is an uncommon tumor, surgery should be performed by a surgeon who is familiar with this type of cancer and experienced with the operation required. Chemotherapy and radiation do not work very well for this type of cancer. Radiation is used in some people after surgery. New treatments are being investigated in clinical trials. Your provider can tell you more about these, if needed. Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 About 86% of those with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid live at least 5 years after diagnosis. The 10 year survival rate is 65%. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: 
Cancer spreads to other areas of the body
   
Parathyroid glands are accidentally removed during surgery
   When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. Prevention 
 
 Prevention may not be possible. But, being aware of your risk factors, especially your family history, may allow for early diagnosis and treatment. For people who have a very strong family history of MTC, the option to remove the thyroid gland may be recommended. You should carefully discuss this option with a doctor who is very familiar with the disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Thyroid - medullary carcinoma; Cancer - thyroid (medullary carcinoma); MTC; Thyroid nodule - medullary Images 
 
 
 Thyroid cancer - CT scan 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute. PDQ thyroid cancer treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 4, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/thyroid/HealthProfessional . Accessed April 4, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: thyroid carcinoma. Version 2.2015.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/thyroid.pdf . Accessed April 4, 2016. Schneider DF, Mazeh H, Lubner SJ, Jaume JC, Chen H. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 71. Read More 
 
 Anaplastic thyroid cancer 
 Hodgkin lymphoma 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Malignancy 
 Metastasis 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Thyroid cancer 
 Thyroid cancer - papillary carcinoma 
 Thyroid function tests 
 Thyroid nodule 
 
 Review Date 3/16/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Cancer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia