
 Thyroid nodule 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A thyroid nodule is a growth (lump) in the thyroid gland. The thyroid gland is located at the front of the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle. Causes 
 
 Thyroid nodules are growths of cells in the thyroid gland. These growths can be:  Not cancer (benign) or thyroid cancer (malignant) Fluid-filled (cysts) One nodule or a group of small nodules Producing thyroid hormones (hot nodule) or not making thyroid hormones (cold nodule) Thyroid nodules are more common in women than in men. A person's chance of getting a thyroid nodule increases with age. Only a few thyroid nodules are due to  thyroid cancer . A thyroid nodule is more likely to be cancer if you: Have a hard nodule Have a nodule that is stuck to nearby structures Have a family history of thyroid cancer Have noticed a change in your voice Are younger than 20 or older than 70 Have a history of radiation exposure to the head or neck Are male  Causes of thyroid nodules are not always found, but can include: Hashimoto's disease Lack of iodine in the diet  Symptoms 
 
 Most thyroid nodules do not cause symptoms. Large nodules can press against other structures in the neck. This can cause symptoms such as: 
 A visible  goiter  (enlarged thyroid gland) Hoarseness or changing voice Pain in the neck Problems breathing , especially when lying down flat Problems swallowing food Nodules that produce thyroid hormones will likely cause symptoms of  overactive thyroid gland , including: Warm, sweaty skin Fast pulse Increased appetite Nervousness Restlessness Skin blushing or flushing Weight loss Irregular menstrual periods Older people with a nodule that produces too much thyroid hormone may have only vague symptoms, including: Fatigue Palpitations Chest pain Memory loss Thyroid nodules are sometimes found in people who have Hashimoto's disease. This may cause symptoms of an underactive thyroid gland, such as: Dry skin Face swelling Fatigue Hair loss Feeling cold when other people do not Weight gain  Irregular menstrual periods Very often, nodules produce no symptoms. Health care providers find thyroid nodules only during a routine physical exam or imaging tests that are done for another reason. A few people have thyroid nodules that are big enough that they notice the nodule on their own, and ask a provider to examine their neck. Exams and Tests 
 
 If a provider finds a nodule or you have symptoms of a nodule, the following tests may be done: TSH level  and other thyroid blood tests Thyroid ultrasound Thyroid scan  (nuclear medicine)
  Fine needle aspiration biopsy  of the nodule or of multiple nodules
  Treatment 
 
 Your provider may recommend  surgery to remove all or part of your thyroid gland  if the nodule is: Due to thyroid cancer Causing symptoms such as swallowing or breathing problems If the fine needle biopsy is inconclusive, and your provider can't tell whether the nodule is a cancer Making too much thyroid hormone People with nodules that are making too much thyroid hormone may be treated with radioiodine therapy. This reduces the size and activity of the nodule. Pregnant women are not given this treatment.  Both surgery to remove thyroid gland tissue and radioactive iodine treatment can cause lifelong hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid). This condition needs to be treated with thyroid hormone replacement. For noncancerous nodules that do not cause symptoms and are not growing, the best treatment may be: Careful follow-up with a physical exam and ultrasound A thyroid biopsy repeated 6 to 12 months after diagnosis, especially if the nodule has grown  Another possible treatment is an ethanol (alcohol) injection into the nodule to shrink it. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Noncancerous thyroid nodules are not life-threatening. Many do not require treatment. Follow-up exams are enough.  The outlook for thyroid cancer depends on the type of cancer. For most common kinds of thyroid cancer, the outlook is very good after treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you feel or see a lump in your neck, or if you have any symptoms of a thyroid nodule. If you have been exposed to radiation in the face or neck area, call your provider. A neck ultrasound can be done to look for thyroid nodules. Alternative Names 
 
 Thyroid tumor - nodule; Thyroid adenoma - nodule; Thyroid carcinoma - nodule; Thyroid cancer - nodule; Thyroid incidentaloma; Hot nodule; Cold nodule; Thyrotoxicosis - nodule; Hyperthyroidism - nodule References 
 
 Gharib H, Papini E, Paschke R, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, Associazione Medici Endocrinologi, and European Thyroid Association Medical Guidelines for Clinical Practice for the Diagnosis and Management of Thyroid Nodules.  Endocr Pract.  2010;16(suppl 1):1-43. Kim M, Ladenson P. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman' s Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 226. Schlumberger MJ, Filetti S, Alexander, EK, Hay ID. Nontoxic diffuse goiter, nodular thyroid disorders, and thyroid malignancies. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.  13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto disease) 
 Laryngeal nerve damage 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II 
 Thyroid cancer 
 Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma 
 Thyroid gland removal 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Thyroid gland removal - discharge 
 Review Date 4/19/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Benign Tumors 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia