
 Tinea versicolor 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tinea versicolor is a long-term (chronic) fungal infection of the skin. Causes 
 
 Tinea versicolor is fairly common. It is caused by a type of fungus called  Malassezia . This fungus is normally found on human skin. It only causes a problem in certain settings. The condition is most common in adolescents and young adults. It typically occurs in hot climates. It does not spread person to person. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is  patches  of discolored skin that: Have sharp borders (edges) and fine scales Are often dark reddish to tan in color Are found on the back, underarms, upper arms, chest, and neck Do not darken in the sun so may appear lighter than the surrounding healthy skin  African Americans may have a loss of skin color or an increase in skin color. Other symptoms include: Increased sweating Itching Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine a  skin scraping  under a microscope to look for the fungus. A  skin biopsy  may also be performed with a special stain called PAS to identify fungus and yeast. Treatment 
 
 The condition is treated with antifungal medicine that is either applied to the skin or taken by mouth.  Applying over-the-counter dandruff shampoo containing selenium sulfide or ketoconazole to the skin for 10 minutes each day in the shower is another treatment option. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Tinea versicolor is easy to treat. Changes in skin color may last for months. The condition may come back during warm weather. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you develop symptoms of tinea versicolor. Prevention 
 
 Avoid excessive heat or sweating if you have had this condition in the past. You can also use anti-dandruff shampoo on your skin every month to help prevent the problem.    Alternative Names 
 
 Pityriasis versicolor Images 
 
 
 Tinea versicolor - close-up 
 Tinea versicolor - shoulders 
 Tinea versicolor - close-up 
 Tinea versicolor on the back 
 Tinea versicolor - back 
 References 
 
 Gupta AK, Copper EA, Simpson FC. Tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor). In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 236. Patterson JW. Mycoses and algal infections. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Candida infection of the skin 
 Scales 
 Skin - abnormally dark or light 
 Skin color - patchy 
 
 Review Date 10/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.  Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Fungal Infections 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia