
 Tolmetin overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tolmetin is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. It is used to help relieve pain, tenderness, swelling, and stiffness due to certain types of arthritis or other conditions that cause inflammation, such as sprains or strains. Tolmetin  overdose  occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Tolmetin Where Found 
 
 These medicines contain tolmetin: Tolectin Novo-tolmetin Other medicines may also contain tolmetin. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of an overdose of tolmetin in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS Rapid breathing Slow breathing Wheezing  EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Blurred vision Ringing in the ears KIDNEYS AND BLADDER Kidney failure NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma Confusion Convulsions Dizziness Drowsiness Incoherence (not understandable) Unsteadiness STOMACH AND INTESTINAL TRACT Abdominal pain Blood in the stomach and intestines Diarrhea Heartburn Nausea and vomiting (sometimes bloody) SKIN Rash Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away and call poison control. Standard procedure is to make the person throw up, unless the person is unconscious or having convulsions. Poison control will tell you what to do. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine, if known Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed If the medicine was prescribed for the person Poison Control 
 
 Your  local poison center  can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (through a vein) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms and reverse the effects of the drug Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach ( gastric lavage ) X-rays  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is very likely. However, gastrointestinal bleeding may be severe and require blood transfusion. Kidney damage may be permanent. Some people may need endoscopy, placing a tube through the mouth to the stomach, to stop the bleeding. Some may need to use a kidney machine (dialysis) if their kidney function does not return to normal. Alternative Names 
 
 Tolectin overdose References 
 
 Bruno GR, Carter WA. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM, eds.  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide . 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004:chap 172. Long H. Acetaminophen, aspirin, and NSAIDs. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 144. Seger DL, Murray L. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 149. 
 Review Date 7/6/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia