
 Tongue biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A tongue biopsy is a minor surgery that is done to remove a small piece of the tongue. The tissue is then examined under a microscope. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A tongue biopsy can be done using a needle. You will get numbing medicine at the place where the biopsy is to be done. The health care provider will gently stick the needle into the tongue and remove a tiny piece of tissue.  Some types of tongue biopsies remove a thin slice of tissue. Medicine to numb the area (local anesthetic) will be used. Others are done under general anesthesia, (allowing you to be asleep and pain-free) so that a larger area may be removed and examined. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may be told not to eat or drink anything for several hours before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Your tongue is very sensitive so a needle biopsy may be uncomfortable even when numbing medicine is used. Your tongue can be tender or sore, and it may feel slightly swollen after the biopsy. You may have stitches or an open sore where the biopsy was done. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done to find the cause of abnormal growths or suspicious-looking areas of the tongue. Normal Results 
 
 The tongue tissue is normal when examined.  What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may mean: Amyloidosis Tongue (oral) cancer Viral ulcer Benign tumors Risks 
 
 Risks for this procedure include: Bleeding Infection Swelling  of the tongue (can obstruct the airway and cause  breathing difficulty )  Complications from this procedure are rare. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - tongue Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Tongue biopsy 
 References 
 
 Eusterman VD. History and Physical Examination, Screening and Diagnostic Testing.  Otolaryngol Clin North Am . Feb 2011;44(1):1-29. PMID: 21093621  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21093621 .  Read More 
 
 Oral cancer 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 
 Review Date 2/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Alan Lipkin, MD, Otolaryngologist, private practice, Denver, CO. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Oral Cancer 
 Tongue Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia