
 Tonsillectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tonsillectomy is a surgery to remove the tonsils. The tonsils are glands at the back of your throat. The tonsils are often removed along with the adenoid glands. That surgery is called  adenoidectomy  and is most often done in children. Description 
 
 The surgery is done while the child is under general anesthesia. Your child will be asleep and pain-free. The surgeon will place a small tool into your child's mouth to hold it open. The surgeon then cuts, burns, or shaves away the tonsils. The wounds heal naturally without stitches.  After surgery, your child will stay in the recovery room until he or she is awake and can breathe easily, cough, and swallow. Most children go home several hours after this surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 The tonsils help protect against infections. But children with large tonsils may have problems breathing at night. The tonsils may also trap excess bacteria which can lead to frequent or very painful sore throats. In either of these cases, the child's tonsils have become more harmful than protective. You and your child's health care provider may consider a tonsillectomy if: Your child has infections often (7 or more times in 1 year, or 5 or more times over 2 years). Your child misses a lot of school. Your child has trouble breathing and does not sleep well because the tonsils block the airway (sleep apnea). Your child has an abscess or a growth on the tonsils. Risks 
 
 The risks for any anesthesia are: Reaction to medicines Breathing problems The risks for any surgery are: Bleeding Infection  Rarely, bleeding after surgery can go unnoticed and cause very bad problems. Swallowing a lot may be a sign of bleeding from the tonsils. Another risk includes injury to the uvula (soft palate). Before the Procedure 
 
 Your child's provider may ask your child to have: Blood tests ( complete blood count ,  electrolytes , and clotting factors) A physical exam and medical history  Always tell your child's provider what drugs your child is taking. Include any drugs, herbs, or vitamins you bought without a prescription During the days before the surgery: Ten days before the surgery, your child may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), warfarin (Coumadin), and other drugs like these. Ask your child's provider which drugs your child should still take on the day of the surgery.  On the day of the surgery: Your child will most often be asked not to drink or eat anything for several hours before the surgery. Give your child any drugs you have been told to give with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 A tonsillectomy is most often done in a hospital or surgery center. Your child will go home the same day as the surgery. Children rarely need to stay overnight in the hospital for observation. Complete recovery takes about 1 to 2 weeks. During the first week, your child should avoid people who are sick. It will be easier for your child to become infected during this time. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After surgery, the number of throat infections is most often lower, but your child may still get some. Alternative Names 
 
 Tonsils removal; Tonsillitis - tonsillectomy; Pharyngitis - tonsillectomy; Sore throat - tonsillectomy Images 
 
 
 Throat anatomy 
 Tonsillectomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Goldstein NA. Evaluation and management of pediatric obstructive sleep apnea. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 184 Wetmore RF. Tonsils and adenoids. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 383. Read More 
 
 Adenoid removal 
 Otitis 
 Tonsillitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Tonsil and adenoid removal - discharge 
 Tonsil removal - what to ask your doctor  
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tonsillitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia