
 Tooth - abnormal shape 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An abnormally shaped tooth is any tooth that has an irregular shape. Considerations 
 
 The appearance of normal teeth varies, especially the molars. Abnormally shaped teeth can result from many different conditions. Specific diseases can affect tooth shape, tooth color, and when they grow in. Some diseases can lead to absence of teeth. Causes 
 
 Some diseases that can cause abnormal tooth shape and growth are: Congenital syphilis Cerebral palsy Ectodermal dysplasia , anhidrotic Incontinentia pigmenti achromians Cleidocranial dysostosis Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Ellis-van Creveld syndrome When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Talk to a dentist or health care provider if the shape of your child's teeth appears to be abnormal. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The dentist will examine the mouth and teeth. You will be asked questions about your child's medical history and symptoms, such as: Does your child have any medical conditions that may cause abnormal tooth shape? At what age did the teeth appear? In what order did the teeth appear? Does your child have other tooth problems (color, spacing)? What other symptoms are also present?  Fillings, dental restorations, crowns, or bridges may be needed to correct the abnormal shape and improve the appearance of the teeth. Dental x-rays  and other diagnostic tests may be done. Alternative Names 
 
 Hutchinson incisors; Abnormal tooth shape; Peg teeth; Mulberry teeth; Conical teeth References 
 
 Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Abnormalities of teeth. In: Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC, eds.  Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology . 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2016:chap 2. Tinanoff N. Development and developmental anomalies of the teeth. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 307. 
 Review Date 2/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael Kapner, DDS, general and aesthetic dentistry, Norwalk Medical Center, Norwalk, CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Tooth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia