
 Tooth abscess 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A tooth abscess is a buildup of infected material (pus) in the center of a tooth. It is an infection caused by bacteria. Causes 
 
 A tooth abscess may form if there is  tooth decay . It may also occur when a tooth is broken, chipped, or injured in other ways. Openings in the tooth enamel allow bacteria to infect the center of the tooth (the pulp). Infection may spread from the root of the tooth to the bones supporting the tooth. Infection results in a buildup of pus and tissue swelling within the tooth. This causes a  toothache . The toothache may stop if pressure is relieved. But the infection can remain active and continue to spread. This can cause more pain and can destroy tissue. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptom is a severe toothache. The pain is continuous. It does not stop. It can be described as gnawing, sharp, shooting, or throbbing. Other symptoms may include:  Bitter taste in the mouth Breath odor General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling Fever Pain when chewing Sensitivity of the teeth to hot or cold Swelling of the gum over the infected tooth, which may look like a pimple Swollen glands  of the neck Swollen area of the upper or lower jaw, which is a very serious symptom  Exams and Tests 
 
 Your dentist will closely look at your teeth, mouth, and gums. It may hurt when the dentist taps the tooth. Biting or closing your mouth tightly also increases the pain. Your gums may be swollen and red, and may drain thick material. Dental x-rays and other tests can help your dentist determine which tooth or teeth are causing the problem. Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to cure the infection, save the tooth, and prevent complications. Your dentist might prescribe antibiotics to fight the infection. Warm saltwater rinses may help ease the pain. Over-the-counter pain relievers may relieve your toothache and fever. Do NOT place aspirin directly on your tooth or gums. This increases irritation of the tissues and can result in  mouth ulcers . A root canal may be recommended in an attempt to save the tooth. If you have a severe infection, your tooth may be removed, or you may need surgery to drain the abscess. Some people may need to be admitted to the hospital. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Untreated abscesses may get worse and can lead to life-threatening complications. Prompt treatment cures the infection in most cases. The tooth can often be saved.  Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Loss of the tooth Blood infection Spread of infection to soft tissue Spread of infection to the jaw bone Spread of infection to other areas of the body, which can cause  brain abscess , inflammation in the heart,  pneumonia , or other complications When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your dentist if you have a throbbing toothache that does not go away, or if you notice a bubble (or “pimple”) on your gums. Prevention 
 
 Prompt treatment of dental decay reduces the risk of tooth abscess. Have your dentist examine any broken or chipped teeth right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Periapical abscess; Dental abscess; Tooth infection; Abscess - tooth Images 
 
 
 Tooth anatomy 
 References 
 
 Amsterdam JT. Oral medicine. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 70. Mehta NR, Scrivani SJ, Spierings ELH. Dental and facial pain. In: Benzon HT, Rathmell JP, Wu CL, Turk DC, Argoff CE, Hurley RW, eds.  Practical Management of Pain . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Brain abscess 
 Cellulitis 
 Dental cavities 
 Endocarditis 
 Ludwig’s angina 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Root canal 
 Toothaches 
 
 Review Date 2/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael Kapner, DDS, general and aesthetic dentistry, Norwalk Medical Center, Norwalk, CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Tooth Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia