
 Toothpaste overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toothpaste is a product used to clean teeth. This article discusses the effects of swallowing a lot of toothpaste. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Sodium fluoride 
 Triclosan Where Found 
 
 Various toothpastes Symptoms 
 
 Swallowing a large amount of regular toothpaste may cause stomach pain and possible intestinal blockage. These additional symptoms may occur when swallowing a large amount of toothpaste containing fluoride: Convulsions Diarrhea Difficulty breathing Drooling Heart attack Salty or soapy taste in the mouth Slow heart rate Shock Tremors Vomiting Weakness Home Care 
 
 Do NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. Seek immediate medical help. If the product was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless told otherwise by a health care provider. Do NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Determine the following information: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 If you swallow toothpaste that does not contain fluoride, you may not need to go to the hospital. Those who swallow a lot of fluoride toothpaste, especially if they are small children, may need to go to the hospital emergency department. At the emergency room, the health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive: Activated charcoal to prevent the rest of the poison from getting absorbed into the stomach and digestive tract Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. Calcium (an antidote), to reverse the effect of the poison Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Endoscopy -- a camera down the throat to see burns to the esophagus and stomach Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage )  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 People who swallow a  very large amount of fluoride toothpaste  and survive 48 hours usually recover.  Most nonfluoride toothpastes are nontoxic (nonpoisonous). People are very likely to recover. Images 
 
 
 Tooth anatomy 
 References 
 
 Kulig K. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Marx J, ed.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 147. 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Cosmetics 
 Browse the Encyclopedia