
 Total protein 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The total protein test measures the total amount of two classes of proteins found in the fluid portion of your blood. These are albumin and globulin. Proteins are important parts of all cells and tissues. Albumin helps prevent fluid from leaking out of blood vessels. Globulins are an important part of your immune system.  How the Test is Performed 
 
 A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is  drawn from a vein  located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Many medicines can interfere with blood test results. Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.  Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is often done to diagnose nutritional problems, kidney disease or  liver disease .  If total protein is abnormal, you will need to have more tests will need to be done to look for the exact cause of the problem. Normal Results 
 
 The normal range is 6.0 to 8.3 gm/dL (grams per deciliter) or 60 to 83 g/L. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Higher-than-normal levels may be due to: Chronic  inflammation or infection, including HIV and hepatitis B or C Multiple myeloma Waldenstrom disease Lower-than-normal levels may be due to: Agammaglobulinemia Bleeding (hemorrhage) Burns  (extensive) Glomerulonephritis Liver disease Malabsorption Malnutrition Nephrotic syndrome Protein-losing enteropathy  Considerations 
 
 Total protein measurement may be increased during pregnancy. Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. Manary MJ, Trehan I. Protein-energy malnutrition. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 215. Read More 
 
 Agammaglobulinemia 
 Albumin - blood (serum) test 
 Amino acids 
 Antibody 
 Burns 
 Chronic 
 Congenital nephrotic syndrome 
 Fibrinogen blood test 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Hemoglobin 
 Liver disease 
 Malabsorption 
 Multiple myeloma 
 Polycythemia vera 
 Protein in diet 
 
 Review Date 5/3/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Tests 
 Liver Diseases 
 Liver Function Tests 
 Browse the Encyclopedia