
 Total iron binding capacity 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) is a blood test to see if you have too much or too little iron in your blood. Iron moves through the blood attached to a protein called transferrin. This test helps your health care provider know how well that protein can carry iron in your blood. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You should not eat or drink for 8 hours before the test. Certain medicines may affect the result of this test. Your provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines. DO NOT stop any medicine before talking to your provider. Medicines that can affect the test result include: Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Birth control pills Chloramphenicol Fluorides  How the Test will Feel 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may recommend this test if: You have signs or symptoms of  anemia  due to low iron. Other lab tests suggest you have anemia due to low iron levels  Normal Results 
 
 Normal value range is: Iron: 60 to 170 micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) or 10.74 to 30.43 micronoles per liter (micromol/L) TIBC: 240 to 450 mcg/dL or 42.96 to 80.55 micromol/L Transferrin saturation: 20% to 50%  The numbers above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 TIBC is usually higher than normal when the body's iron supplies are low. This can occur with: Iron deficiency anemia Pregnancy (late) Lower-than-normal TIBC may mean: Anemia due to red blood cells being destroyed too quickly ( hemolytic anemia ) Lower-than-normal level of protein in the blood (hypoproteinemia) Inflammation Liver disease, such as  cirrhosis Malnutrition Decrease in red blood cells from the intestines not properly absorbing vitamin B12 ( pernicious anemia ) Sickle cell anemia Risks 
 
 There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: Excessive bleeding Fainting or feeling lightheaded Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin) Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names 
 
 TIBC; Anemia -TIBC Images 
 
 
 Blood test 
 References 
 
 Brittenham GM. Disorders of iron homeostasis: iron deficiency and overload. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 34. Goljan EF. Red blood cell disorders. In: Goljan EF, ed.  Rapid Review Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 12. Read More 
 
 Anemia 
 Cirrhosis 
 Ferritin blood test 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hemolytic anemia 
 Iron deficiency anemia 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Serum iron test 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 
 Review Date 2/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Anemia 
 Cirrhosis 
 Iron 
 Liver Diseases 
 Sickle Cell Anemia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia