
 Total abdominal colectomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Total abdominal colectomy is the removal of the large intestine from the lowest part of the small intestine (ileum) to the rectum. After it is removed, the end of the small intestine is sewn to the rectum. Description 
 
 You will receive  general anesthesia  before your surgery. This will make you asleep and unable to feel pain. During the surgery: Your surgeon will make a surgical cut in your belly. The surgeon will remove your large intestine. Your rectum and anus will be left in place. Your surgeon will sew the end of your small intestine to your rectum.  Today, some surgeons perform this operation using a camera. The surgery is done with a few small surgical cuts, and sometimes a larger cut big enough for the surgeon to assist with the operation. The advantages of this surgery, which is called laparoscopy, are a faster recovery, less pain, and only a few small cuts. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 The procedure is done for people who have: Crohn disease  that has not spread to the rectum or the anus Many  colon cancer  tumors, when the rectum is not affected Severe  constipation , called colonic inertia  Risks 
 
 Total abdominal colectomy is most often safe. Your risk depends on your general overall health. Ask your health care provider about these possible complications. Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems 
  Bleeding,  blood clots Infection Risks for this surgery are: Bleeding inside your belly. Damage to nearby organs in the body. Scar tissue may form in the belly and cause a blockage of the small intestine. Leakage of stool from the connection between the small intestine and the rectum. This can cause an infection or abscess. Scarring of the connection between the small intestine and the rectum. This can cause a blockage of the intestine. Wound breaking open. Wound infections. Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your provider what drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. Ask which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. Before you have surgery, talk with your provider about the following things: Intimacy and sexuality Pregnancy Sports Work  During the 2 weeks before your surgery: Two weeks before surgery you may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), Naprosyn (Aleve, Naproxen), and others. Ask which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke,  try to stop . Ask your provider for help. Always let your provider know about any cold, flu, fever, herpes breakout, or other illnesses you may have before your surgery. The day before your surgery: Follow your provider's instruction about what to eat and drink. You may be asked to drink only clear liquids such as broth, clear juice, and water at some point during the day. You will be told when to stop eating and drinking. You may be asked to stop eating solid food after midnight, but you might be able to have clear liquids up until 2 hours before surgery. Your provider may ask you to use enemas or laxatives to clear out your intestines. You will get instructions on how to use them.  On the day of your surgery: Take the drugs you were told to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will be in the hospital for 3 to 7 days. By the second day, you will probably be able to drink clear liquids. You will slowly be able to add thicker fluids and then soft foods to your diet as your bowels begin to work again. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 After this procedure, you can expect to have 4 to 6 bowel movements a day. You may need more surgery and an  ileostomy  if you have Crohn disease and it spreads to your rectum. Most people who have this surgery recover fully. They are able to do most of the activities they were doing before their surgery. This includes most sports, travel, gardening, hiking, and other outdoor activities, and most types of work. Alternative Names 
 
 Ileorectal anastomosis; Subtotal colectomy 
 References 
 
 Araghizadeh F. Ileostomy, colostomy, and pouches. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 117. Mahmoud NM, Bleier JIS, Aarons CB, Paulson EC, Shanmugan S, Fry RD. Colon and rectum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Crohn disease 
 Ileostomy 
 Total proctocolectomy and ileal-anal pouch 
 Total proctocolectomy with ileostomy  
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bland diet 
 Ileostomy and your child 
 Ileostomy and your diet 
 Ileostomy - caring for your stoma 
 Ileostomy - changing your pouch 
 Ileostomy - discharge 
 Ileostomy - what to ask your doctor  
 Living with your ileostomy 
 Low-fiber diet 
 Total colectomy or proctocolectomy - discharge 
 Types of ileostomy 
 Ulcerative colitis - discharge 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonic Diseases 
 Colorectal Cancer 
 Constipation 
 Browse the Encyclopedia