
 Total proctocolectomy and ileal-anal pouch 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Total proctocolectomy and ileal-anal pouch surgery is the removal of the large intestine and most of the rectum. The surgery is done in one or two stages. Description 
 
 You will receive  general anesthesia  right before your surgery. This will make you sleep and unable to feel pain. You may have the procedure in one or two stages: Your surgeon will make a surgical cut in your belly. Then your surgeon will remove your large intestine. Next your surgeon will remove your rectum. Your anus and anal sphincter will be left in place. The anal sphincter is the muscle that opens your anus when you have a bowel movement. Then your surgeon will make a pouch out of the last 1 1/2 feet (45 centimeters) of your small intestine. The pouch is sewn to your anus. Today some surgeons perform this operation using a camera. This surgery is called laparoscopy. It is done with a few small surgical cuts. Sometimes a larger cut is made so the surgeon can assist by hand. The advantages of this surgery are a faster recovery, less pain, and only a few small cuts. If you have an ileostomy, your surgeon will close it during the last stage of the surgery. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 This procedure may be done for: Ulcerative colitis Familial polyposis Risks 
 
 Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are: Reactions to medicines Breathing problems 
   Bleeding,  blood clots Infection Risks for this surgery include: Bulging tissue through the cut, called an  incisional hernia Damage to nearby organs in the body and nerves in the pelvis Scar tissue that forms in the belly and causes a blockage of the small intestine The place where the small intestine is sewn to the anus may come open ( anastomosis ), which can be life threatening Wound breaks open Wound infections Before the Procedure 
 
 Always tell your health care provider what drugs you are taking, even drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription. Before you have surgery, talk with your provider about the following things: Intimacy and sexuality Pregnancy Sports Work  During the 2 weeks before your surgery: Two weeks before surgery you may be asked to stop taking drugs that make it harder for your blood to clot. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), Naprosyn (Aleve, Naproxen), and others. Ask which drugs you should still take on the day of your surgery. If you smoke,  try to stop . Ask your provider for help. Always let your provider know about any  cold ,  flu ,  fever , herpes breakout, or other illnesses you may have before your surgery.  The day before your surgery: You may be asked to drink only clear liquids, such as broth, clear juice, and water after a certain time. Follow the instructions you have been given about when to stop eating and drinking. Your may need to use enemas or laxatives to clear out your intestines. Your provider will give you instructions on how to use them.  On the day of your surgery: Take the drugs you have been told to take with a small sip of water. You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.  After the Procedure 
 
 You will be in the hospital for 3 to 7 days. By the second day, you will most likely be able to drink clear liquids. You will be able to add thicker fluids and then soft foods to your diet as your bowel begins to work again. While you are in the hospital for the first stage of your surgery, you will learn how to care for your ileostomy. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 You will probably have 4 to 8 bowel movements a day after this surgery. You will need to adjust your lifestyle for this. Most people recover fully. They are able to do most activities they were doing before their surgery. This includes most sports, travel, gardening, hiking, and other outdoor activities, and most types of work. Alternative Names 
 
 Restorative proctocolectomy; Ileal-anal resection; Ileal-anal pouch; J-pouch; S-pouch; Pelvic pouch; Ileal-anal pouch; Ileal pouch-anal anastomosis; IPAA; Ileal-anal reservoir surgery References 
 
 Araghizadeh F. Ileostomy, colostomy, and pouches. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 117. Mahmoud NN, Bleier JIS, Aarons CB, Paulson EC, Shanmugan S, Fry RD. Colon and rectum. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 51. Read More 
 
 Colon cancer 
 Colorectal polyps 
 Crohn disease 
 Ileostomy 
 Total abdominal colectomy 
 Total proctocolectomy with ileostomy  
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bland diet 
 Ileostomy and your child 
 Ileostomy and your diet 
 Ileostomy - caring for your stoma 
 Ileostomy - changing your pouch 
 Ileostomy - discharge 
 Ileostomy - what to ask your doctor  
 Living with your ileostomy 
 Low-fiber diet 
 Total colectomy or proctocolectomy - discharge 
 Types of ileostomy 
 Ulcerative colitis - discharge 
 Review Date 9/17/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonic Polyps 
 Ulcerative Colitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia