
 Toxic synovitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toxic synovitis is a condition affecting children that causes  hip pain  and limping. Causes 
 
 Toxic synovitis occurs in children before puberty. It is a type of  arthritis  of the hip. Its cause is not known. Boys are affected more often than girls. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Hip pain (on one side only) Limp Thigh pain, in front and toward the middle of the thigh Knee pain Low-grade fever, less than 101°F (38.33°C) Aside from the hip discomfort, the child does not usually appear ill. Exams and Tests 
 
 Toxic synovitis is diagnosed when other, more serious conditions have been ruled out, such as: Septic hip Slipped capital femoral epiphysis Legg-Calve-Perthes disease Tests used to diagnose toxic synovitis include: Ultrasound  of the hip X-ray  of the hip ESR C-reactive protein  (CRP) Complete blood count  (CBC) Other tests that may be done to rule out other causes of hip pain: Aspiration  of fluid from the hip joint Bone scan MRI Treatment 
 
 Treatment often includes limiting activity to make the child more comfortable. But, there is no danger with normal activities. The health care provider may prescribe nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIDS) to reduce pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The hip pain goes away within 7 to 10 days. Possible Complications 
 
 Toxic synovitis goes away on its own. There are no expected long-term complications. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your child's provider if: Your child has unexplained hip pain or a limp, with or without a fever Your child has been diagnosed with toxic synovitis and the hip pain lasts for longer than 10 days, the pain gets worse, or a high fever develops Alternative Names 
 
 Synovitis - toxic; Transient synovitis References 
 
 Horowitz R. Pediatric orthopedic emergencies. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine: Clinical Essentials . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 25. Sankar WN, Horn BD, Wells L, Dormans JP. The hip. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 678. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Fever 
 Hip pain 
 
 Review Date 7/13/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arthritis 
 Hip Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia