
 Toxic nodular goiter 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toxic nodular goiter involves an enlarged thyroid gland. The gland contains areas that have increased in size and formed nodules. One or more of these nodules produce too much thyroid hormone. Causes 
 
 Toxic nodular goiter starts from an existing  simple goiter . It occurs most often in older adults. Risk factors include being female and over 55 years old. This disorder is rare in children. Most people who develop it have had a goiter with nodules for many years. Sometimes, people with toxic multinodular goiter will develop high thyroid levels for the first time. This mostly occurs after they take in a large amount of iodine through a vein (intravenously) or by mouth. The iodine may be used as contrast for a  CT scan  or  heart catheterization . Taking medicines that contain iodine, such as amiodarone, may also lead to the disorder. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms are the same as those of an overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ). However, the bulging eyeballs seen in  Graves disease  do not occur. Symptoms may include any of the following: Fatigue Frequent bowel movements Heat intolerance Increased appetite Increased sweating Irregular menstrual period (in women) Muscle cramps Nervousness Restlessness Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 A  physical examination  will show 1 or many  nodules  in the thyroid. There may be a  rapid heart rate . Other tests that may be done include: Serum thyroid hormone levels ( T3 ,  T4 )
   Serum TSH  (thyroid stimulating hormone)
   Thyroid uptake and scan  or  radioactive iodine uptake Thyroid ultrasound Treatment 
 
 Beta-blockers (propranolol) can control some of the symptoms of hyperthyroidism until thyroid hormone levels in the body are under control. Certain drugs can block or change how the thyroid gland uses iodine. These drugs may be used to control the overactive thyroid gland in any of the following cases: Before surgery or radioiodine therapy occurs As a long term treatment Radioiodine therapy may be used. Radioactive iodine is given by mouth. It then concentrates in the overactive thyroid tissue and causes damage. Some people, but not all, may need to take thyroid replacement afterwards. Surgery to remove the thyroid may be done when: Very large goiter or a goiter is causing symptoms by blocking the airway Thyroid cancer is present Rapid treatment is needed Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Toxic nodular goiter is mainly a disease of older adults, so other  chronic  health problems may affect the outcome of this condition. An older adult may be less able to tolerate the effect of the disease on the heart. However, the condition is often treatable with medicines. Possible Complications 
 
 Heart complications: Heart failure Irregular heartbeat ( atrial fibrillation ) 
   Rapid heart rate
    Other complications: 
   Bone loss leading to  osteoporosis Thyroid crisis or storm is an  acute  worsening of hyperthyroidism symptoms. It may occur with infection or  stress . Thyroid crisis may cause: 
   Abdominal pain
    
  Decreased mental alertness
    
  Fever
    People with this condition need to go to the hospital right away. Complications of having a very large goiter may include difficulty breathing or swallowing. These complications are due to pressure on the airway passage (trachea) or esophagus, which lies behind the thyroid. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Follow the provider's instructions for follow-up visits. Prevention 
 
 To prevent toxic nodular goiter, treat hyperthyroidism and simple goiter as your provider suggests. Alternative Names 
 
 Toxic multinodular goiter; Plummer disease; Thyrotoxicosis - nodular goiter; Overactive thyroid - toxic nodular goiter; Hyperthyroidism - toxic nodular goiter; Toxic multinodular goiter; MNG Images 
 
 
 Thyroid enlargement - scintiscan 
 Thyroid gland 
 References 
 
 Hegedus L, Paschke R, Krohn K, Bonnema SJ. Multinodular goiter. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 90. Kim M, Ladenson PW. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 226. Kopp P. Autonomously functioning thyroid nodules and other causes of thyrotoxicosis. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Acute 
 Atrial fibrillation or flutter 
 Goiter - simple 
 Graves disease 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 2/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Thyroid Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia