
 Toxic megacolon 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toxic megacolon occurs when swelling and inflammation spread into the deeper layers of your colon. As a result, the colon stops working and widens. In severe cases, the colon may rupture. Causes 
 
 The term "toxic" means that this problem is very dangerous. Toxic megacolon may occur in people with an inflamed colon due to:  Ulcerative colitis , or  Crohn disease  that is not well controlled  Infections of the colon  Other forms of megacolon include pseudo-obstruction, acute colonic ileus, or congenital colonic dilation. These conditions do not involve an infected or inflamed colon. Symptoms 
 
 The rapid widening of the colon may cause the following symptoms to occur over a short period of time: Painful and  distended abdomen Fever If the colon ruptures, symptoms may include Rapid heart rate Shock , when a bodywide infection leads to dangerously low blood pressure Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam may reveal signs of  septic shock . The health care provider will notice tenderness in the abdomen and possible loss of  bowel sounds . Tests: Abdominal x-ray , ultrasound, CT scan, or MRI scan  Blood electrolytes Complete blood count Treatment 
 
 Treatment of the disorder that led to toxic megacolon may be started, including: Steroids and other medicines that suppress the immune system Antibiotics If you have septic shock, you will be admitted to the intensive care unit of the hospital. Treatment may include: Breathing machine (mechanical ventilation) Dialysis for kidney failure Drugs to treat low blood pressure, infection, or poor blood clotting Fluids given directly into a vein (intravenously) Oxygen If rapid widening is allowed to continue, an opening or rupture can form in the colon. Therefore, most cases of toxic megacolon will need  surgery  to remove a part of or the entire colon. You may receive antibiotics to prevent  sepsis  (a severe infection). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the condition does not improve, it can be life threatening. In this case, a colectomy is usually needed. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Perforation of the colon Sepsis Shock  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you develop severe abdominal pain, especially if you also have: Bloody diarrhea Fever Frequent diarrhea Rapid heart rate Tenderness when the abdomen is pressed Prevention 
 
 Treating diseases that cause toxic megacolon, such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease, can prevent this condition. Alternative Names 
 
 Toxic dilation of the colon; Megarectum; Inflammatory bowel disease - toxic megacolon; Crohn disease - toxic megacolon; Ulcerative colitis - toxic megacolon Images 
 
 
 Digestive system 
 Toxic megacolon 
 Crohn disease - affected areas 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Lichtenstein GR. Inflammatory bowel disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 141. Marrero F. Severe complications of inflammatory bowel disease.  Med Clin North Am . 2008;92:671-686. PMID: 18387381  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18387381 . Peterson MA. Disorders of the large intestine. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 95. Read More 
 
 Crohn disease 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 
 Review Date 10/27/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Colonic Diseases 
 Crohn's Disease 
 Ulcerative Colitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia