
 Toxoplasmosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Toxoplasmosis is an infection due to the parasite  Toxoplasma gondii . Causes 
 
 Toxoplasmosis is found in humans worldwide and in many kinds of animals and birds. The parasite also lives in cats. Human infection may result from: Blood transfusions or solid organ transplants Handling cat litter Eating contaminated soil Eating raw or undercooked meat (lamb, pork, and beef) Toxoplasmosis also affects people who have weakened immune systems. The infection may also be passed from an infected mother to her baby through the placenta. This results in  congenital toxoplasmosis .  Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they usually occur about 1 to 2 weeks after contact with the parasite. The disease can affect the brain, lung, heart, eyes, or liver. Symptoms in persons with otherwise healthy immune systems can include: Enlarged lymph nodes  in the head and neck Headache Fever Mild illness similar to  mononucleosis Muscle pain Sore throat  Symptoms in people with a weakened immune system can include: Confusion Fever Headache Blurred vision due to inflammation of the retina Seizures Exams and Tests 
 
 The doctor or nurse will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include: Antibody titers for toxoplasmosis CT scan of the head MRI of head Slit lamp exam of the eyes Brain  biopsy Treatment 
 
 Persons without symptoms usually do not need treatment. Medicines to treat the infection include an antimalarial drug and antibiotics. People with AIDS should continue treatment for as long as their immune system is weak, to prevent the disease from reactivating. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, people with a healthy immune system usually recover well.  Possible Complications 
 
 The disease may return.  In people with a weakened immune system, the infection may spread throughout the body, leading to death.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if you develop symptoms of toxoplasmosis. Medical care is needed right away if symptoms occur in: Infants or babies Someone with a weakened immune system due to certain medicines or disease Also seek medical treatment right away if the following symptoms occur: Confusion Seizures Prevention 
 
 Tips for preventing this condition: Do not eat undercooked meat.  Wash hands after handling raw meat. Keep children's play areas free from cat and dog feces. Wash your hands thoroughly after touching soil that may be contaminated with animal feces. Pregnant women and those with weakened immune systems should take the following precautions: Do not clean cat litter boxes  Do not touch anything that may contain cat feces Do not touch anything that could be contaminated by insects, such as cockroaches and flies that may be exposed to cat feces Pregnant women and those with HIV/AIDS should be screened for toxoplasmosis. A blood test can be done.  Images 
 
 
 Slit-lamp exam 
 Congenital toxoplasmosis 
 References 
 
 Ferri FF. Toxoplasmosis. In: Ferri FF, ed.  Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2016 . Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:1243-1244. Montoya JG, Boothroyd JC, Kovacs JA.  Toxoplasma gondii . In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 280. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia