
 Tracheitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tracheitis is a bacterial infection of the windpipe (trachea). Causes 
 
 Bacterial tracheitis is most often caused by the bacteria  Staphylococcus aureus.  It often follows a  viral upper respiratory infection . It affects mostly young children. This may be due to their tracheas being smaller and more easily blocked by swelling.  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms include: Deep  cough  (similar to that caused by  croup ) Difficulty breathing High  fever High-pitched breathing sound ( stridor )  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and listen to the child's lungs. The muscles between the ribs may pull in as the child tries to breathe. This is called  intercostal retractions . Tests that may be done to diagnose this condition include: Blood oxygen level Nasopharyngeal culture  to look for bacteria Tracheal culture to look for bacteria X-ray  of the trachea Tracheoscopy Treatment 
 
 The child often needs to have a tube placed into the airways to help with breathing. This is called an endotracheal tube. The child will receive antibiotics through a vein. The health care team will closely monitor the child's breathing and use oxygen, if needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With prompt treatment, the child should recover. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Airway obstruction  (can lead to death) Toxic shock syndrome  if the condition was caused by the bacteria staphylococcus When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Tracheitis is an emergency medical condition. Go to the emergency room right away if your child has had a recent upper respiratory infection and suddenly has a high fever, a cough that gets worse, or trouble breathing. Alternative Names 
 
 Bacterial tracheitis; Acute bacterial tracheitis References 
 
 Cukor J, Manno M. Pediatric respiratory emergencies: upper airway obstruction and infections. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 168. Meyer A. Pediatric infectious disease. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund V, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 197. Weiner DJ, Finder JD. Pulmonary disorders. In: Zitelli, BJ, McIntire SC, Norwalk AJ, eds.
 Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis 
. 6th ed.  Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 16. Read More 
 
 Breathing difficulty 
 Common cold 
 Croup 
 Toxic shock syndrome 
 
 Review Date 8/29/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Tang Ho, MD, Assistant Professor, Division of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Staphylococcal Infections 
 Tracheal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia