
 Tracheostomy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A tracheostomy is a surgical procedure to create an opening through the neck into the trachea (windpipe). A tube is usually placed through this opening to provide an airway and to remove secretions from the lungs. This tube is called a tracheostomy tube or trach tube. Description 
 
 General anesthesia  is used, unless the situation is critical. If that happens, a numbing medicine is placed into the area to help you feel less pain during the procedure. Other medicines are also given to relax and calm you (if there is time). The neck is cleaned and draped. Surgical cuts are made to reveal the tough cartilage rings that form the outer wall of the trachea. The surgeon creates an opening into the trachea and inserts a tracheostomy tube. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 A tracheostomy may be done if you have: A large object blocking the airway An inability to breathe on your own An inherited abnormality of the larynx or trachea Breathed in harmful material such as smoke, steam, or other toxic gases that swell and block the airway Cancer of the neck, which can affect breathing by pressing on the airway Paralysis  of the muscles that affect swallowing Severe neck or mouth injuries Surgery around the voicebox (larynx) that prevents normal breathing and swallowing Risks 
 
 The risks for any anesthesia are: Problems breathing Reactions to medicines, including heart attack and stroke, or allergic reaction (rash, swelling, breathing difficulty)  The risks for any surgery are: Bleeding Infection Nerve injury, including paralysis Scarring  Other risks include: Abnormal connection between the trachea and major blood vessels Damage to the thyroid gland Erosion  of the trachea (rare) Puncture of the lung and lung collapse Scar tissue in the trachea that causes pain or trouble breathing  After the Procedure 
 
 If the tracheostomy is temporary, the tube will eventually be removed. Healing will occur quickly, leaving a minimal scar. Sometimes, a surgical procedure may be needed to close the site (stoma). Occasionally a stricture, or tightening of the trachea may develop, which may affect breathing. If the tracheostomy tube is permanent, the hole remains open. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people need 1 to 3 days to adapt to breathing through a tracheostomy tube. It will take some time to learn how to communicate with others. At first, it may be impossible for the person to talk or make sounds. After training and practice, most people can learn to talk with a tracheostomy tube. People or family members learn how to take care of the tracheostomy during the hospital stay. Home-care service may also be available. You should be able to go back to your normal lifestyle. When you are outside, you can wear a loose covering (a scarf or other protection) over the tracheostomy stoma (hole). Use safety precautions when you are exposed to water, aerosols, powder, or food particles. Images 
 
 
 Tracheostomy  - series 
 References 
 
 Goldenberg D, Bhatti N. Management of the impaired airway in the adult. In: Cummings CW, Flint PW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.  Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2005:chap 106. Greenwood JC, Winters ME. Tracheostomy care. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 7. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Muscle function loss 
 
 Review Date 1/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Critical Care 
 Tracheal Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia