
 Treacher Collins syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Treacher Collins syndrome is a condition that is passed down through families (hereditary). It leads to problems with the structure of the face. Causes 
 
 Changes to 1 of 3 genes,  TCOF1 ,  POLR1C , or  POLR1D , can lead to Treacher Collins syndrome. The condition can be passed down through families (inherited). However, most of the time, there is not another affected family member. This condition may vary in severity from generation to generation and from person to person. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Outer part of the ears are abnormal or almost completely missing Hearing loss Very small jaw ( micrognathia ) Very large mouth Defect in the lower eyelid ( coloboma ) Scalp hair that reaches to the cheeks Cleft palate Exams and Tests 
 
 The child most often will show normal intelligence. An exam of the infant may reveal a variety of problems, including: Abnormal eye shape Flat cheekbones Clefts in the face Small jaw Low-set ears Abnormally formed ears Abnormal ear canal Hearing loss Defects in the eye (coloboma that extends into the lower lid) Decreased eyelashes on the lower eyelid Genetic tests can help identify gene changes linked to this condition. Treatment 
 
 Hearing loss is treated to ensure better performance in school. Being followed by a plastic surgeon is very important, because children with this condition may need a series of operations to correct birth defects. Plastic surgery can correct the  receding chin  and other changes in face structure. Support Groups 
 
 FACES: The National Craniofacial Association:  www.faces-cranio.org/Disord/Treacher.htm Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Children with this syndrome typically grow to become functioning adults of normal intelligence. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Feeding difficulty Speaking difficulty Communication problems Vision problems When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This condition is most often seen at birth.  Genetic counseling can help families understand the condition and how to care for the person. Prevention 
 
 Genetic counseling is recommended if you have a family history of this syndrome and wish to become pregnant. Alternative Names 
 
 Mandibulofacial dysostosis; Treacher Collins-Franceschetti syndrome References 
 
 Katsanis SH, Jabs EW. Treacher Collins syndrome.  Gene Reviews.  Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 2012:8. PMID: 20301704  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20301704 . Accessed August 1, 2015. Tinanoff N. Syndromes with oral manifestations. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 311. Read More 
 
 Autosomal dominant 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Craniofacial Abnormalities 
 Browse the Encyclopedia