
 Trisomy 18 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Trisomy 18 is a genetic disorder in which a person has a third copy of material from  chromosome  18, instead of the usual 2 copies. Causes 
 
 Trisomy 18 occurs in 1 in 6,000 live births. It is 3 times more common in girls than boys.  The syndrome occurs when there is extra material from chromosome 18. The extra material affects normal development. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Clenched hands Crossed legs Feet with a rounded bottom (rocker-bottom feet) Low birth weight Low-set ears Mental delay Poorly developed fingernails Small head ( microcephaly ) Small jaw ( micrognathia ) Undescended testicle Unusual shaped chest ( pectus carinatum )  Exams and Tests 
 
 An exam during pregnancy may show an unusually large uterus and extra  amniotic fluid . There may be an unusually small placenta when the baby is born. A physical exam of the infant may show unusual fingerprint patterns. X-rays may show a short breast bone.
 Chromosome studies  will show trisomy 18. The chromosome abnormality may be present in every cell or present in only a certain percentage of the cells (called mosaicism). Studies may also show part of the chromosome in some cells. Rarely, part of the chromosome 18 becomes attached to another chromosome. This is called  translocation . Other signs include: Hole, split, or cleft in the iris of the eye ( coloboma ) Separation between the left and right side of the abdominal muscle ( diastasis recti ) Umbilical hernia  or  inguinal hernia There are often signs of  congenital heart disease , such as: Atrial septal defect  (ASD) Patent ductus arteriosus  (PDA) Ventricular septal defect  (VSD)  Tests may also show kidney problems, including: Horseshoe kidney Hydronephrosis Polycystic kidney Treatment 
 
 There are no specific treatments for trisomy 18. Which treatments are used depend on the person's individual condition. Support Groups 
 
 Support groups include: Support Organization for Trisomy 18, 13 and Related Disorders (SOFT):  trisomy.org Trisomy 18 Foundation:  www.trisomy18.org Hope for Trisomy 13 and 18:  www.hopefortrisomy13and18.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Half of infants with this condition do not survive beyond the first week of life. Nine out of 10 children will die by 1 year of age. Some children have survived to the teenage years, but with serious medical and developmental problems. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications depend on the specific defects and symptoms. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Genetic counseling can help families understand the condition, the risks of inheriting it, and how to care for the person. Prevention 
 
 Tests can be done during pregnancy to find out if the child has this syndrome. Genetic testing is recommended for parents who have a child with this syndrome and who want to have more children. Alternative Names 
 
 Edwards syndrome Images 
 
 
 Syndactyly 
 References 
 
 Bacino CA, Lee B. Cytogenetics. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 81. Read More 
 
 Chromosome 
 
 Review Date 8/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Birth Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia