
 Tularemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Tularemia is a bacterial infection common in wild rodents. The bacteria are passed to humans through contact with tissue from the infected animal. The bacteria can also be passed by  ticks , biting flies, and mosquitoes. Causes 
 
 Tularemia is caused by the bacterium  Francisella tularensis. Humans can get the disease through: A bite from an infected tick, horsefly, or mosquito Breathing in infected dirt or plant material Direct contact, through a break in the skin, with an infected animal or its dead body (most often a rabbit, muskrat, beaver, or squirrel) Eating infected meat (rare)  The disorder most commonly occurs in North America and parts of Europe and Asia. In the US, this disease is found more often in Missouri, South Dakota, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. Although outbreaks can occur in the United States, they are rare. Some people may develop  pneumonia  after breathing in infected dirt or plant material. This infection has been known to occur on Martha's Vineyard, where bacteria are present in rabbits, raccoons, and skunks. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms develop 3 to 5 days after exposure. The illness usually starts suddenly. It may continue for several weeks after symptoms begin. Symptoms include: Chills Eye irritation ( conjunctivitis , if the infection began in the eye) Fever Headache Joint stiffness Muscle pains Red spot on the skin, growing to become a sore (ulcer) Shortness of breath Sweating Weight loss Exams and Tests 
 
 Tests for the condition include: Blood culture  for the bacteria Blood test measuring the body's immune response to the infection ( serology for tularemia ) Chest x-ray Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of a sample from an ulcer  This disease may also affect the results of  febrile agglutinins  and some tests for  infectious mononucleosis . Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to cure the infection with antibiotics. The antibiotics streptomycin and tetracycline are commonly used to treat this infection. Another antibiotic, gentamicin, has been tried as an alternative to streptomycin. Gentamicin seems to be very effective, but it has been studied in only a small number of people because this is a rare disease. The antibiotics tetracycline and chloramphenicol can be used alone, but are not usually a first choice. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Tularemia is fatal in about 5% of untreated cases, and in less than 1% of treated cases. Possible Complications 
 
 Tularemia may lead to these complications: Bone infection ( osteomyelitis ) Infection of the sac around the heart ( pericarditis ) Meningitis Pneumonia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms develop after a rodent bite, tick bite, or exposure to the flesh of a wild animal. Prevention 
 
 Preventive measures include wearing gloves when skinning or dressing wild animals, and staying away from sick or dead animals. Alternative Names 
 
 Deerfly fever; Rabbit fever; Pahvant Valley plague; Ohara disease; Yato-byo (Japan); Lemming fever Images 
 
 
 Deer ticks 
 Ticks 
 Tick imbedded in the skin 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 Penn RL.  Francisella tularensis  (Tularemia). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Disease . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 229. Schaffner W. Tularemia and other  Francisella  infections. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 311. Read More 
 
 Atypical pneumonia 
 Endemic 
 Insect bites and stings 
 Meningitis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Pericarditis 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Tick bite 
 
 Review Date 2/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Animal Diseases and Your Health 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Biodefense and Bioterrorism 
 Tick Bites 
 Browse the Encyclopedia