
 Types of health care providers 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article describes health care providers involved in primary care, nursing care, and specialty care. Information 
 
 PRIMARY CARE A primary care provider (PCP) is a person you may see first for checkups and health problems. PCPs can help manage your overall health. If you have a health care plan, find out what type of practitioner can serve as your PCP. The term "generalist" often refers to  medical doctors  (MDs) and  doctors of osteopathic medicine  (DOs) who specialize in internal medicine, family practice, or pediatrics. Obstetrician/Gynecologists (OB/GYNs) are doctors who specialize in obstetrics and gynecology, including women's health care, wellness, and prenatal care. Many women use an OB/GYN as their primary care provider. Nurse practitioners  (NPs) are nurses with graduate training. They can serve as a primary care provider in family medicine (FNP), pediatrics (PNP), adult care (ANP), or geriatrics (GNP). Others are trained to address women's health care (common concerns and routine screenings) and family planning. NPs can prescribe medicines. A  physician assistant  (PA) can provide a wide range of services in collaboration with a Doctor of Medicine (MD) or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO).  NURSING CARE Licensed practical nurses (LPNs) are state-licensed caregivers who have been trained to care for the sick. Registered nurses (RNs) have graduated from a nursing program, have passed a state board examination, and are licensed by the state. Advanced practice nurses have education and experience beyond the basic training and licensing required of all RNs. Advanced practice nurses include nurse practitioners (NPs) and the following: Clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) have training in a field such as cardiac, psychiatric, or community health. Certified nurse midwives  (CNMs) have training in women's health care needs, including prenatal care, labor and delivery, and the care of a woman who has given birth. Certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) have training in the field of anesthesia. Anesthesia is the process of putting a person into a painless sleep, and keeping the person's body working so surgeries or special tests can be done.  DRUG THERAPY Licensed pharmacists have graduate training from a college of pharmacy. Your pharmacist prepares and processes drug prescriptions that were written by your primary or specialty care provider. Pharmacists provide information to people about medicines. They also consult with health care providers about dosages, interactions, and side effects of medicines. Your pharmacist may also follow your progress to check that you are using your medicine safely and effectively. Pharmacists also can evaluate your health and prescribe medicines. SPECIALTY CARE Your primary care provider may refer you to professionals in various specialties when necessary, such as: Allergy and asthma Anesthesiology -- general anesthesia or spinal block for surgeries and some forms of pain control Cardiology -- heart disorders Dermatology -- skin disorders Endocrinology -- hormonal and metabolic disorders, including  diabetes Gastroenterology -- digestive system disorders General surgery -- common surgeries involving any part of the body Hematology -- blood disorders Immunology -- disorders of the immune system Infectious disease -- infections affecting the tissues of any part of the body Nephrology -- kidney disorders Neurology -- nervous system disorders Obstetrics/gynecology -- pregnancy and women's reproductive disorders Oncology --  cancer  treatment Ophthalmology -- eye disorders and surgery Orthopedics -- bone and connective tissue disorders Otorhinolaryngology -- ear, nose, and throat (ENT) disorders Physical therapy and rehabilitative medicine -- for disorders such as low back injury, spinal cord injuries, and  stroke Psychiatry -- emotional or mental disorders Pulmonary (lung) -- respiratory tract disorders Radiology --  x-rays  and related procedures (such as  ultrasound ,  CT , and  MRI ) Rheumatology -- pain and other symptoms related to joints and other parts of the musculoskeletal system Urology -- disorders of the male reproductive system and urinary tract and the female urinary tract Nurse practitioners and physician assistants may also provide care in association with most types of specialists. Alternative Names 
 
 Physicians; Nurses; Health care providers; Doctors; Pharmacists Images 
 
 
 Types of health care providers 
 References 
 
 Association of American Medical Colleges. Careers in medicine.  www.aamc.org/cim/specialty/exploreoptions/list/ . Accessed July 15, 2016. American Academy of PAs. What is a PA?  www.aapa.org/what-is-a-pa/ . Accessed July18, 2016. American Association of Nurse Practitioners. What is an NP?  www.aanp.org/all-about-nps/what-is-an-np . Accessed July 18, 2016. 
 Review Date 7/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Health Occupations 
 Browse the Encyclopedia