
 Typhoid fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Typhoid fever is an infection that causes  diarrhea  and a  rash . It is most commonly caused due to a bacteria called  Salmonella typhi  ( S typhi ). Causes 
 
 S typhi  is spread through contaminated food, drink, or water. If you eat or drink something that is contaminated with the bacteria, the bacteria enter your body. They travel into your intestines, and then into your blood. In the blood, they travel to your lymph nodes, gallbladder, liver, spleen, and other parts of the body. Some people become carriers of  S typhi  and continue to release the bacteria in their stools for years, spreading the disease. Typhoid fever is common in developing countries. Fewer than 400 cases are reported in the US each year. Most cases in the US are brought in from other countries where typhoid fever is common. Symptoms 
 
 Early symptoms include  fever , general ill-feeling, and  abdominal pain . High fever (103°F, or 39.5°C) or higher and severe diarrhea occur as the disease gets worse. Some people develop a rash called "rose spots," which are small red spots on the abdomen and chest. Other symptoms that occur include: Abdominal tenderness Bloody stools Chills Agitation,  confusion , delirium, seeing or hearing things that are not there ( hallucinations ) Difficulty paying attention (attention deficit) Mood swings Nosebleeds Severe fatigue Slow, sluggish, weak feeling  Exams and Tests 
 
 A  complete blood count  (CBC) will show a high number of white blood cells. A  blood culture  during the first week of the fever can show  S typhi  bacteria. Other tests that can help diagnose this condition include: ELISA  urine test to look for the bacteria that cause Typhoid fever Fluorescent  antibody  study to look for substances that are specific to Typhoid bacteria Platelet count  (platelet count may be low) Stool culture Treatment 
 
 Fluids and  electrolytes  may be given by IV (into a vein) or you may be asked to drink water with electrolyte packets. Antibiotics are given to kill the bacteria. There are increasing rates of antibiotic resistance throughout the world, so your health care provider will check current recommendations before choosing an antibiotic. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms usually improve in 2 to 4 weeks with treatment. The outcome is likely to be good with early treatment, but becomes poor if complications develop. Symptoms may return if the treatment has not completely cured the infection. Possible Complications 
 
 Health problems that may develop include: Intestinal hemorrhage (severe  GI bleeding ) Intestinal perforation Kidney failure Peritonitis When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have any of the following: You know you have been exposed to someone who has typhoid fever You have been in an area where there are people who have typhoid fever and you develop symptoms of typhoid fever You have had typhoid fever and the symptoms return You develop severe abdominal pain,  decreased urine output , or other new symptoms  Prevention 
 
 A vaccine is recommended for travel outside of the US to places where there is typhoid fever. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website has information about where typhoid fever is common --  www.cdc.gov/nczved/divisions/dfbmd/diseases/typhoid_fever . Ask your provider if you should bring electrolyte packets in case you get sick. When traveling, drink only boiled or bottled water and eat well-cooked food.  Water treatment, waste disposal, and protecting the food supply from contamination are important public health measures. Carriers of typhoid must not be allowed to work as food handlers. Alternative Names 
 
 Enteric fever Images 
 
 
 Salmonella typhi organism 
 Fly 
 Digestive system organs 
 References 
 
 Harris JB, Ryan ET. Enteric fever and other causes of fever and abdominal symptoms. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 102. Wain J, Hendriksen RS, Mikoleit ML, Keddy KH, Ochiai RL. Typhoid fever.  Lancet . 2015;385;1136-45. PMID: 25458731  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25458731 . Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Delirium 
 Diarrhea - overview 
 Fatigue 
 Fever 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Hepatic 
 Malaise 
 Peritonitis 
 Rashes 
 Systemic 
 Weakness 
 
 Review Date 5/1/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Salmonella Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia