
 Ulnar nerve dysfunction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ulnar nerve dysfunction is a problem with the nerve that travels from the shoulder to the hand, called the ulnar nerve. It helps you move your arm, wrist, and hand. Causes 
 
 Damage to one nerve group, such as the ulnar nerve, is called  mononeuropathy . Mononeuropathy means there is damage to a single nerve. Both local and body-wide disorders may damage just one nerve. Causes of mononeuropathy include: An illness in the whole body that damages a single nerve Direct injury to the nerve Long-term pressure on the nerve Pressure on the nerve caused by swelling or injury of nearby body structures Ulnar neuropathy is also common in those with diabetes. Ulnar neuropathy occurs when there is damage to the ulnar nerve. This nerve travels down the arm to the wrist, hand, and ring and little fingers. It passes near the surface of the elbow. So, bumping the nerve there causes the pain and tingling of "hitting the funny bone." When the nerve compressed in the elbow, a problem called cubital tunnel syndrome may result. When damage destroys the nerve covering ( myelin  sheath) or part of the nerve itself, nerve signaling is slowed or prevented. Damage to the ulnar nerve can be caused by: Long-term pressure on the elbow or base of the palm An elbow  fracture  or  dislocation In some cases, no cause can be found. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Abnormal sensations in the little finger and part of the ring finger, usually on the palm side Weakness , loss of coordination of the fingers Clawlike deformity of the hand and wrist 
  Pain,  numbness , decreased sensation, tingling, or burning sensation in the areas controlled by the nerve Pain or numbness may awaken you from sleep. Activities such as tennis or golf may make the condition worse. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may be asked what you were doing before the symptoms started. Tests that may be needed include: Blood tests Imaging tests to view the nerve and nearby structures Nerve conduction tests  to check how fast nerve signals travel Electromyography ( EMG ) to check the health of the ulnar nerve and the muscles it controls Nerve biopsy  to examine a piece of nerve tissue (rarely needed)  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to allow you to use the hand and arm as much as possible. Your provider will find and treat the cause, if possible. Sometimes, no treatment is needed and you will get better on your own. If medicines are needed, they may include: Over-the-counter or prescription medicines Corticosteroid injections around the nerve to reduce swelling and pressure Your provider will likely suggest self-care measures. These may include: A supportive splint at either the wrist or elbow to help prevent further injury and relieve the symptoms. You may need to wear it all day and night, or only at night. An elbow pad if the ulnar nerve is injured at the elbow. Also, avoid bumping or leaning on the elbow. Physical therapy exercises to help maintain muscle strength in the arm. Occupational therapy or counseling to suggest changes in the workplace may be needed. Surgery to relieve pressure on the nerve may help if the symptoms get worse, or if there is proof that part of the nerve is wasting away. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 If the cause of the nerve dysfunction can be found and successfully treated, there is a good chance of a full recovery. In some cases, there may be partial or complete loss of movement or sensation. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Deformity of the hand Partial or complete loss of sensation in the hand or fingers Partial or complete loss of wrist or hand movement Recurrent or unnoticed injury to the hand When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have an arm injury and develop numbness, tingling, pain, or weakness down your forearm and the ring and little fingers. Prevention 
 
 Avoid prolonged pressure on the elbow or palm.  Casts , splints, and other appliances should always be examined for proper fit. Alternative Names 
 
 Neuropathy - ulnar nerve; Ulnar nerve palsy; Mononeuropathy; Cubital tunnel syndrome Images 
 
 
 Ulnar nerve damage 
 References 
 
 Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 107. Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 420. Wolfe VM, Rosenwasser MP, Tang P. Entrapment neuropathies of the arm, elbow, and forearm. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 67. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Dislocation 
 Mononeuropathy 
 Multiple mononeuropathy 
 Myelin 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Systemic 
 
 Review Date 5/30/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network Stony Brook, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hand Injuries and Disorders 
 Peripheral Nerve Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia