
 Ultrasound 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves to make images of organs and structures inside the body. How the Test is Performed 
 
 An ultrasound machine makes images so that organs inside the body can be examined. The machine sends out high-frequency sound waves, which reflect off body structures. A computer receives the waves and uses them to create a picture. Unlike with an x-ray or CT scan, this test does not use ionizing radiation.  The test is done in the ultrasound or radiology department.  You will lie down for the test. A clear, water-based gel is applied to the skin on the area to be examined. The gel helps with the transmission of the sound waves. A handheld probe called a transducer is moved over the area being examined. You may need to change position so that other areas can be examined.  How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Your preparation will depend on the part of the body being examined. How the Test will Feel 
 
 Most of the time, ultrasound procedures do not cause discomfort. The conducting gel may feel a little cold and wet. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The reason for the test will depend on your symptoms. An ultrasound test may be used to identify problems involving: Arteries in the neck Veins or arteries in the arms or legs Pregnancy Pelvis Abdomen and kidneys Breast Thyroid Eye and orbit Normal Results 
 
 Results are considered normal if the organs and structures being examined look OK. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 The meaning of abnormal results will depend on the part of the body being examined and the problem found. Talk to your health care provider about your questions and concerns. Risks 
 
 There are no known risks. The test does not use ionizing radiation. Considerations 
 
 Some types of ultrasound tests need to be done with a probe that is inserted into your body. Talk to your provider about how your test will be done. Alternative Names 
 
 Sonogram Images 
 
 
 Abdominal ultrasound 
 Ultrasound in pregnancy 
 17 week ultrasound 
 30 week ultrasound 
 Carotid duplex 
 Ultrasound comparison 
 Thyroid ultrasound 
 Ultrasound 
 Ultrasound, normal fetus- ventricles of brain 
 3D ultrasound 
 References 
 
 Butts C. Ultrasound. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 66. Cosgrove DO, Eckersley RJ, Harvey CJ, Lim A. Ultrasound. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier; 2015:chap 3. Read More 
 
 Intravascular ultrasound  
 
 Review Date 7/3/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ultrasound 
 Browse the Encyclopedia