
 Upper airway biopsy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Upper airway biopsy is surgery to remove a small piece of tissue from the nose, mouth, and throat area for examination. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The health care provider will spray a numbing medicine in your mouth and throat. A metal tube is inserted to hold your tongue out of the way. Another numbing medicine flows through the tube down the back of the throat. This may cause you to cough at first. When the area feels thick or swollen, it is numb. The are provider looks at the abnormal area, and removes a small piece of tissue. It is sent to the laboratory for examination. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 DO NOT eat for 6 to 12 hours before the test.  Tell your provider if you take a blood thinner, such as aspirin, plavix or coumadin, when you schedule the biopsy. You may need to stop taking them for a little while. Never stop taking any medicines without first talking to your provider.  How the Test will Feel 
 
 As the area is being numbed, you may feel like there is fluid running down the back of your throat. You may feel the need to cough or gag. And you may feel pressure or mild tugging. When the numbness wears off, your throat may feel scratchy for several days. After the test, the cough reflex will return in 1 to 2 hours. Then you may eat and drink normally. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test may be done if your doctor thinks there is a problem with your upper airway. It may also be done with a  bronchoscopy . Normal Results 
 
 The upper airway tissues are normal, with no abnormal growths. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Disorders or conditions that may be discovered include: Benign (noncancerous) cysts or masses Cancer Certain infections Granulomas  and related inflammation (may be caused by  tuberculosis ) Autoimmune disorders, such as Wegner's granulomatosis Necrotizing vasculitis Risks 
 
 Risks for this procedure include: Bleeding (some bleeding is common, heavy bleeding is not) Breathing difficulties Sore throat  There is a risk of choking if you swallow water or food before the numbness wears off. Alternative Names 
 
 Biopsy - upper airway Images 
 
 
 Upper airway test 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Throat anatomy 
 References 
 
 Yung RC, Boss EF. Tracheobronchial endoscopy. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 75. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 
 Review Date 11/25/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, BS, Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Biopsy 
 Cancer 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Vasculitis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia