
 Upper GI and small bowel series 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 An upper GI and small bowel series is a set of  x-rays  taken to examine the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine. Barium enema  is a related test.
  How the Test is Performed 
 
 An upper GI and small bowel series is done in a health care office or hospital radiology department. You may get an injection of a medicine that slows muscle movement in the small intestine. This makes it easier to see the structures of your organs on the x-rays. Before the x-rays are taken, you must drink 16 to 20 ounces (480 to 600 milliliters) of a milkshake-like drink. The drink contains a substance called barium, which shows up well on x-rays. An x-ray method called fluoroscopy tracks how the barium moves through your esophagus, stomach, and small intestine. Pictures are taken while you sit or stand in different positions.  The test most often takes around 3 hours but can take as long as 6 hours to complete. A GI series may include this test or a barium enema. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You may have to change your diet for 2 or 3 days before the test. In most cases, you will not be able to eat for a period of time before the test. Be sure to ask your health care provider if you need to change how you take any of your medicines. Often you can continue taking the medicines you take by mouth. Never make any changes in your medicines without first talking to your provider. You will be asked to remove all jewelry on your neck, chest, or abdomen before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-ray may cause mild bloating but no discomfort most of the time. The barium milkshake feels chalky as you drink it. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to look for a problem in the structure or function of your esophagus, stomach, or small intestine. Normal Results 
 
 A normal result shows that the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine are normal in size, shape, and movement. Normal value ranges may vary depending on the lab doing the test. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results in the esophagus may indicate the following problems:  Achalasia Diverticula Esophageal cancer Esophageal narrowing (stricture) - benign Hiatal hernia Ulcers Abnormal results in the stomach may indicate the following problems:  Gastric cancer Gastric ulcer  - benign Gastritis Polyps (a tumor that is usually noncancerous and grows on the  mucus membrane ) Pyloric stenosis  (narrowing)  Abnormal results in the stomach may indicate the following problems:  Malabsorption  syndrome Swelling and irritation of the small intestines Tumors Ulcers  The test may also be done for the following conditons: Annular pancreas Duodenal ulcer Gastroesophageal reflux disease Gastroparesis Intestinal obstruction Lower esophageal ring Primary or idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction Risks 
 
 You are exposed to a low level of radiation during this test, which carries a very small risk of cancer. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Pregnant women should not have this test in most cases. Children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays. Barium may cause constipation. Talk to your provider if the barium has not passed through your system by 2 or 3 days after the exam. Considerations 
 
 The upper GI series should be done after other x-ray procedures, because the barium that remains in the body may block details in other imaging tests. Alternative Names 
 
 GI series; Barium swallow x-ray; Upper GI series Images 
 
 
 Barium ingestion 
 Stomach cancer, x-ray 
 Stomach ulcer, x-ray 
 Volvulus - x-ray 
 Small intestine 
 References 
 
 Caroline DF, Dass C, Agusto O. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging . 6th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2015:chap 27. Kim DH, Pickhardt PJ. Diagnostic imaging procedures in gastroenterology. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 135. Read More 
 
 Achalasia 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Annular pancreas 
 Barium enema 
 CMV - gastroenteritis/colitis 
 Crohn disease 
 Cystic fibrosis 
 Diverticulitis 
 Esophageal cancer 
 Esophageal stricture - benign 
 Gastritis 
 Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
 Gastroparesis 
 Hiatal hernia 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Intestinal pseudo-obstruction 
 Lower esophageal ring 
 Malabsorption 
 Mucosa 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Pyloric stenosis - infant 
 Stomach cancer 
 Ulcers 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Digestive Diseases 
 Esophagus Disorders 
 Small Intestine Disorders 
 Stomach Disorders 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia