
 Urinalysis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urinalysis is the physical, chemical, and microscopic examination of urine. It involves a number of tests to detect and measure various compounds that pass through the urine. How the Test is Performed 
 
 A urine sample is needed. Your health care provider will tell you what type of urine sample is needed. Two common methods of collecting urine are  24-hour urine collection  and  clean catch urine specimen .  The sample is sent to a lab, where it is examined for the following: PHYSICAL COLOR AND APPEARANCE How the urine sample looks to the naked eye: Is it clear or cloudy? Is it is pale, or dark yellow, or another color?  MICROSCOPIC APPEARANCE The urine sample is examined under a microscope to: Check if there are any cells, urine crystals,  urinary casts , mucus, and other substances. Identify any bacteria or other germs.  CHEMICAL APPEARANCE ( urine chemistry ) A special strip (dipstick) is used to test for substances in the urine sample. The strip has pads of chemicals that change color when they come in contact with substances of interest.  Examples of specific urinalysis tests that may done to check for problems include: Red blood cell urine test Glucose urine test Protein urine test Urine pH urine test Ketones urine test Bilirubin urine test Urine specific gravity test How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Certain medicines change the color of urine, but this is not a sign of disease. Your provider may tell you to stop taking any medicines that can affect test results. Medicines that can change your urine color include: Chloroquine Iron supplements Levodopa Nitrofurantoin Phenazopyridine Phenothiazine Phenytoin Riboflavin Triamterene  How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 A urinalysis may be done: As part of a routine medical exam to screen for early signs of disease If you have signs of  diabetes  or kidney disease, or to monitor you if you are being treated for these conditions To check for  blood in the urine To diagnose a  urinary tract infection Normal Results 
 
 Normal urine varies in color from almost colorless to dark yellow. Some foods, such as beets and blackberries, may turn urine red. Usually, glucose, ketones, protein, and bilirubin are not detectable in urine. The following are not normally found in urine: Hemoglobin Nitrites Red blood cells White blood cells  Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may mean you have an illness, such as: Urinary tract infection Kidney stones Poorly controlled diabetes Bladder  or  kidney cancer Your provider can discuss the results with you. Risks 
 
 There are no risks. Considerations 
 
 If a home test is used, the person reading the results must be able to see the difference between colors, because the results are interpreted using a color chart. Alternative Names 
 
 Urine appearance and color; Routine urine test Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 McPherson RA, Ben-Ezra J. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Alkalosis 
 Alport syndrome 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Anorexia 
 Atheroembolic renal disease 
 Bladder stones 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Congenital nephrotic syndrome 
 Cystinuria 
 Delirium 
 Dementia 
 Dementia due to metabolic causes 
 Diabetes 
 Diabetes and kidney disease 
 Diabetes insipidus - central 
 Distal renal tubular acidosis 
 Epididymitis 
 Failure to thrive 
 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
 Goodpasture syndrome 
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
 Henoch-Schönlein purpura 
 IgA nephropathy 
 Injury - kidney and ureter 
 Interstitial nephritis 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Malignant hypertension 
 Medullary cystic kidney disease 
 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
 Membranous nephropathy 
 Myelomeningocele 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Orchitis 
 Ovarian cancer 
 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Prostate cancer 
 Prostatitis - bacterial 
 Protein in diet 
 Proximal renal tubular acidosis 
 Reflux nephropathy 
 Renal papillary necrosis 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Retrograde ejaculation 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Scleroderma 
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis 
 Stress urinary incontinence 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Traumatic injury of the bladder and urethra 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Type 2 diabetes 
 Ureterocele 
 Urethral stricture 
 Urethritis 
 Urge incontinence 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Urinary tract infection - children 
 Urine - bloody  
 Vitamin C 
 Wilms tumor 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinalysis 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia