
 Urine chemistry 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urine chemistry is a group of one or more tests done to check the chemical content of a urine sample. How the Test is Performed 
 
 For this test, a  clean catch (midstream) urine sample  is needed.  Some tests require that you collect all of your urine for 24 hours. Your doctor will order certain tests, which will be done on the urine sample in a laboratory. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 For detailed information about how to prepare for the test, how the test will feel, risks with the test, and normal and abnormal values, please see the test your health care provider ordered: 24-hour  urinary aldosterone  excretion rate 24-hour urine protein Acid loading test (pH) Adrenalin - urine test Amylase - urine Bilirubin - urine Calcium - urine Citric acid urine test Cortisol - urine Creatinine - urine Cytology exam of urine Dopamine - urine test Electrolytes - urine Epinephrine - urine test Glucose - urine HCG (qualitative - urine) Homovanillic acid (HVA) Immunoelectrophoresis - urine Immunofixation - urine Ketones - urine Leucine aminopeptidase - urine Myoglobin - urine Norepinephrine - urine test Normetanephrine Osmolality - urine Porphyrins - urine Potassium - urine Protein electrophoresis - urine Protein - urine RBC - urine Sodium - urine Urea nitrogen - urine Uric acid - urine Urinalysis Urine Bence-Jones protein Urinary casts Urine amino acids Urine concentration test Urine culture (catheterized specimen) Urine culture (clean catch) Urine dermatan sulfate Urine - hemoglobin Urine metanephrine Urine pH Urine specific gravity Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) Normal Results 
 
 Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. Alternative Names 
 
 Chemistry - urine Images 
 
 
 Urine test 
 References 
 
 Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 116.  Read More 
 
 Urinalysis 
 
 Review Date 11/26/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Inc.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia