
 Urination - painful 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Painful urination is any pain, discomfort, or burning sensation when passing urine. Considerations 
 
 Pain may be felt right where the urine passes out of the body. Or, it may be felt inside the body, behind the pubic bone, or in the bladder or prostate. Pain on urination is a fairly common problem. People who have pain with urination also may have the urge to  urinate more often . Causes 
 
 Painful urination is most often caused by an infection or inflammation somewhere in the urinary tract. For example it may be a: Bladder infection in an adult Bladder infection in a child Swelling and irritation of the tube that carries urine out of the body (urethra) Painful urination in women and girls may be due to: Changes in the vaginal tissue during menopause ( atrophic vaginitis ) Herpes infection  in the genital area Irritation of the vaginal tissue caused by bubble bath, perfumes, or lotions Vulvovaginitis , such as yeast or other infections of the vulva and vagina  Other causes of painful urination include: Interstitial cystitis Prostate infection ( prostatitis ) Radiation cystitis - damage to the bladder lining from radiation therapy to the pelvis area Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: There is drainage or a discharge from your penis or vagina. You are pregnant and are having any painful urination. You have painful urination that lasts for more than 1 day. You notice blood in your urine. You have a fever.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions such as: When did the painful urination begin? Does the pain occur only during urination? Does it stop after urination? Do you have other symptoms such as back pain? Have you had a  fever  higher than 100 degrees F? Is there drainage or discharge between urinations? Is there an abnormal urine odor? Is there  blood in the urine ? Are there any changes in the volume or frequency of urination? Do you feel the urge to urinate? Are there any  rashes  or  itching  in the genital area? What medicines are you taking? Are you pregnant or could you be pregnant? Have you had a bladder infection? Do you have any  allergies  to any medicines? Have you had sexual intercourse with someone who has, or may have, gonorrhea or chlamydia? Has there been a recent change in your brand of soap, detergent, or fabric softener? Have you had surgery or radiation to your urinary or sexual organs? A urinalysis will be done. A  urine culture  may be ordered. If you have had a previous bladder or kidney infection, a more detailed history and physical are needed. Extra lab tests will also be needed. A pelvic exam and exam of vaginal fluids are needed for women and girls who have vaginal discharge. Men who have discharge from the penis will need to have a urethral swab done. Treatment depends on what is causing the pain. Alternative Names 
 
 Dysuria; Painful urination Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Ban KM, Easter JS. Selected urologic problems. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 99. 
 Review Date 1/21/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Scott Miller, MD, urologist in private practice in Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Interstitial Cystitis 
 Prostate Diseases 
 Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia