
 Urinary catheters 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A urinary catheter is a tube placed in the body to drain and collect urine from the bladder. Information 
 
 Urinary catheters are used to drain the bladder. Your health care provider may recommend that you use a catheter if you have: Urinary incontinence (leaking urine or being unable to control when you urinate) Urinary retention (being unable to empty your bladder when you need to) Surgery on the prostate or genitals Other medical conditions such as  multiple sclerosis , spinal cord injury, or  dementia Catheters come in many sizes, materials (latex, silicone, Teflon™), and types (Foley, straight, coude tip). A Foley catheter, for example, is a soft, plastic or rubber tube that is inserted into the bladder to drain the urine. Your provider will use the smallest possible catheter most of the time. There are three main types of catheters: Indwelling catheter Condom catheter Intermittent self-catheter   
 INDWELLING URETHRAL CATHETERS 
  An indwelling urinary catheter is one that is left in the bladder. You may use an indwelling catheter for a short time or a long time. An indwelling catheter collects urine by attaching to a drainage bag. The bag has a valve that can be opened to allow urine to flow out. An indwelling catheter may be inserted into the bladder in two ways: Most often, the catheter is inserted through the urethra. This is the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body. Sometimes, the provider will insert a catheter into your bladder through a small hole in your belly. This is done at a hospital or provider's office.  An indwelling catheter has a small balloon inflated on the end of it. This prevents the catheter from sliding out of your body. When the catheter needs to be removed, the balloon is deflated.  
 CONDOM CATHETERS 
  Condom catheters can be used by men with incontinence. There is no tube placed inside the penis. Instead, a condom-like device is placed over the penis. A tube leads from this device to a drainage bag. The condom catheter must be changed every day.  
 INTERMITTENT CATHETERS 
  You would use an intermittent catheter when you only need to use a catheter sometimes or you do not want to wear a bag. You or your caregiver will insert the catheter to drain the bladder and then remove it. This can be done only once or several times a day. The frequency will depend on the reason you need to use this method.   
 DRAINAGE BAGS 
  A catheter is most often attached to a drainage bag.   
 
 Keep the drainage bag lower than your bladder so that urine does not flow back up into your bladder. Empty the drainage device when it is about half full and at bedtime. Always wash your hands with soap and water before emptying the bag.  
 HOW TO CARE FOR A CATHETER 
  To care for an indwelling catheter, clean the area where the catheter exits your body and the catheter itself with soap and water every day. Also clean the area after every bowel movement to prevent infection. If you have a suprapubic catheter, clean the opening in your belly and the tube with soap and water every day. Then cover it with dry gauze. Drink plenty of fluids to help prevent infections. Ask your provider how much you should drink. Wash your hands before and after handling the drainage device. DO NOT allow the outlet valve to touch anything. If the outlet gets dirty, clean it with soap and water. Sometimes urine can leak around the catheter. This may be caused by: Catheter that is blocked or that has a kink in it Catheter that is too small Bladder  spasms Constipation The wrong balloon size Urinary tract infections  
 POSSIBLE COMPLICATIONS 
  Complications of catheter use include: Allergy or sensitivity to latex Bladder stones Blood infections ( septicemia ) Blood in the urine  (hematuria) Kidney damage (usually only with long-term, indwelling catheter use) Urethral injury Urinary tract or kidney infections  Call your health care provider if you have: Bladder spasms that do not go away Bleeding into or around the catheter Fever  or chills Large amounts of urine leaking around the catheter Skin sores around a suprapubic catheter Stones or sediment in the urinary catheter or drainage bag Swelling of the urethra around the catheter Urine with a strong smell, or that is thick or cloudy Very little or no urine draining from the catheter and you are drinking enough fluids  If the catheter becomes clogged, painful, or infected, it will need to be replaced right away. Alternative Names 
 
 Catheter - urine; Foley catheter; Indwelling catheter; Suprapubic catheters References 
 
 Cespedes RD, Gerboc JL. Other therapies for storage and emptying failure. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 75. Ennis JD, Wierbicky J, Nesathurai S. Spinal cord injury (thoracic). In: Frontera, WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 156. Resnick NM. Incontinence. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 25. 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 12/14/2016.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 After Surgery 
 Bladder Diseases 
 Spinal Cord Injuries 
 Urethral Disorders 
 Urinary Incontinence 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia