
 Urinary casts 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urinary casts are tiny tube-shaped particles that can be found when urine is examined under the microscope during a test called  urinalysis . Urinary casts may be made up of white blood cells, red blood cells, kidney cells, or substances such as protein or fat. The content of a cast can help tell your health care provider whether your kidney is healthy or abnormal. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The urine sample you provide may need to be from your first morning urine. The sample needs to be taken to the lab within 1 hour. A  clean-catch urine sample  is needed. The clean-catch method is used to prevent germs from the penis or vagina from getting into a urine sample. To collect your urine, the provider may give you a special clean-catch kit that contains a cleansing solution and sterile wipes. Follow instructions exactly so that the results are accurate. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is needed. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The test involves only normal urination. There is no discomfort. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 Your provider may order this test to see if your kidneys are working properly. It may also be ordered to check for certain conditions, such as:  Glomerular disease Interstitial kidney disease Kidney infections  Normal Results 
 
 The absence of cellular casts or presence of a few hyaline casts is normal. The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may include: 
   Fatty casts are seen in people who have lipids in urine. This is most often a complication of  nephrotic syndrome . 
   Granular casts are a sign of many types of kidney diseases. 
   Red blood cell casts mean there is a microscopic amount of bleeding from the kidney. They are seen in many kidney diseases. 
   Renal tubular epithelial cell casts reflect damage to tubule cells in the kidney. These casts are seen in conditions such as  renal tubular necrosis , viral disease (such as  CMV nephritis ), and kidney  transplant rejection . 
   Waxy casts can be found in people with advanced kidney disease and  chronic kidney failure . 
   White blood cell (WBC) casts are more common with acute kidney infections.  Your provider will tell you more about your results. Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. Alternative Names 
 
 Hyaline casts; Granular casts; Renal tubular epithelial casts; Waxy casts; Casts in the urine; Fatty casts; Red blood cell casts; White blood cell casts Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Fogazzi GB, Garigali G. Urinalysis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, eds.  Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 4. Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, et al, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. McPherson RA, Ben-Ezra J. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 28. Read More 
 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Goodpasture syndrome 
 IgA nephropathy 
 Interstitial nephritis 
 Lupus nephritis 
 Necrotizing vasculitis 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (GN) 
 Primary amyloidosis 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Secondary systemic amyloidosis 
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Transplant rejection 
 
 Review Date 8/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Tests 
 Urinalysis 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia