
 Urination - difficulty with flow 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Difficulty starting or maintaining a urine stream is called urinary hesitancy. Considerations 
 
 Urinary hesitancy affects people of all ages and occurs in both sexes. However, it is most common in older men with an enlarged prostate gland. Urinary hesitancy most often develops slowly over time. You may not notice it until you are unable to urinate (called urinary retention). This causes swelling and discomfort in your bladder. Causes 
 
 The most common cause of urinary hesitancy in older men is an  enlarged prostate . Almost all older men have some trouble with dribbling, weak urine stream, and starting urination.  Another common cause is infection of the prostate or urinary tract. Symptoms of a possible infection include: Burning or pain with urination Frequent urination Cloudy urine Sense of urgency (strong, sudden urge to urinate) The problem can also be caused by: Some medicines (such as remedies for colds and allergies, tricyclic antidepressants, some drugs used for incontinence, and some vitamins and supplements) Nervous system disorders  Side effects of surgery Scar tissue (stricture) in the tube leading from the bladder Home Care 
 
 Steps you can take to care for yourself include: Keep track of your urination patterns and bring the report to your health care provider. Apply heat to your lower abdomen (below your belly button and above the pubic bone). This is where the bladder sits. The heat relaxes muscles and aids urination. Massage or apply light pressure over your bladder to help the bladder empty.  Take a warm bath or shower to help stimulate urination. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you notice urinary hesitancy, dribbling, or a weak urine stream. Call your provider right away if: You have a  fever ,  vomiting , side or back pain, shaking chills, or are passing little urine for 1 to 2 days. You have blood in your urine, cloudy urine, a frequent or urgent need to urinate, or a discharge from the penis or vagina. You are unable to pass urine. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will take your medical history and do an exam to look at your pelvis, genitals, rectum, abdomen, and lower back. You may be asked questions such as: How long have you had the problem and when did it start? Is it worse in the morning or at night? Has the force of your urine flow decreased? Do you have dribbling or leaking urine? Does anything help or make the problem worse? Do you have symptoms of an infection? Have you had other medical conditions or surgeries that could affect your urine flow? What medicines do you take?  Tests that may be performed include: Catheterization of the bladder to determine how much urine remains in your bladder after trying to urinate and to get urine for culture (a catheterized urine specimen) Cystometrography Transrectal  ultrasound  of the prostate Urethral swab for culture Urinalysis  and culture Voiding cystourethrogram Treatment for urinary hesitancy depends on the cause, and may include:  Medicines to relieve the symptoms of an enlarged prostate. Antibiotics to treat any infection. Be sure to take all your medicines as directed. Surgery to relieve a prostate blockage ( TURP ). Procedure to dilate or cut scar tissue in the urethra. Alternative Names 
 
 Delayed urination; Hesitancy; Difficulty initiating urination Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history, physical examination, and the urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 114. Zeidel ML. Obstructive uropathy. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 125. 
 Review Date 8/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia