
 Urinary incontinence 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Urinary (or bladder) incontinence happens when you are not able to keep urine from leaking out of your urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine out of your body from your bladder. You may leak urine from time to time. Or, you may not be able to hold any urine. The three main types of urinary incontinence are: Stress incontinence  -- occurs during activities like coughing, sneezing, laughing, or exercise. Urge incontinence  -- involves a strong, sudden need to urinate. Then the bladder squeezes and you lose urine. You don't have enough time after you feel the need to urinate to get to the bathroom before you do urinate. Overflow incontinence -- occurs when the bladder cannot empty. This leads to dribbling.  Mixed incontinence occurs when you have more than one type of urinary incontinence. Bowel incontinence  is when you are unable to control the passage of stool. It is not covered in this article. Causes 
 
 Causes of urinary incontinence include: Blockage in the urinary system Brain or nerve problems Dementia or other mental health problems that make it hard to feel and respond to the urge to urinate Problems with the urinary system Nerve and muscle problems  Incontinence may be sudden and go away after a short period of time. Or, it may continue long-term. Causes of sudden or temporary incontinence include: Bedrest -- for example, when recovering from surgery Certain medications (such as diuretics, antidepressants, tranquilizers, some cough and cold remedies, and antihistamines) Mental confusion Pregnancy Prostate infection or inflammation Stool  impaction  from severe constipation, which causes pressure on the bladder Urinary tract infection  or inflammation Weight gain  Causes that may be more long-term: Alzheimer's disease Bladder cancer Bladder spasms Depression Large prostate in men Nervous system conditions, such as multiple sclerosis or stroke Nerve or muscle damage after radiation treatment to the pelvis Pelvic prolapse in women -- falling or sliding of the bladder, urethra, or rectum into the vagina. This may be caused by pregnancy and delivery. Problems with the urinary tract Spinal cord injuries Weakness of the sphincter, the circle-shaped muscles that open and close the bladder. This can be caused by prostate surgery in men, or surgery to the vagina in women.  Home Care 
 
 If you have symptoms of incontinence, see your health care provider for tests and a treatment plan. Which treatment you get depends on what caused your incontinence and what type you have. There are four main treatment approaches for urinary incontinence: Lifestyle changes.  These changes may help improve incontinence. You may need to make these changes along with other treatments. Keep your bowel movements regular to avoid constipation. Try increasing the fiber in your diet. Quit smoking to reduce coughing and bladder irritation. Smoking also increases your risk for bladder cancer. Avoid alcohol and caffeinated drinks such as coffee, which can stimulate your bladder. Lose weight if you need to. Avoid foods and drinks that may irritate your bladder. These include spicy foods, carbonated drinks, and citrus fruits and juices. If you have diabetes, keep your blood sugar under good control.  For urine leaks, wear absorbent pads or undergarments. There are many  well-designed products  no one else will notice. Bladder training and pelvic floor exercises.  Bladder retraining helps you gain better control over your bladder. Kegel exercises can help strengthen the muscles of your pelvic floor. Your provider can show you how to do them. Many women do not do these exercises correctly, even if they believe they are doing them correctly. Often, people benefit from formal bladder strengthening and retraining with a pelvic floor specialist. Medicines.  Depending on the type of incontinence you have, your health care provider may prescribe one or more medicines. These drugs help prevent muscle spasms, relax the bladder, and improve bladder function. Your provider can help you learn how to take these medicines and manage their side effects. Surgery.  If other treatments do not work, or you have severe incontinence, your provider may recommend surgery. The type of surgery you have will depend on: The type of incontinence you have (such as  urge ,  stress , or overflow) How severe your symptoms are The cause (such as pelvic prolapse,  enlarged prostate , enlarged uterus, or other causes)  If you have overflow incontinence or you cannot fully empty your bladder, you may need to use a  catheter . You may use a catheter that stays in long term, or one that you are taught to put in and take out yourself. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Talk to your health care provider about incontinence. Health care providers who treat incontinence are called gynecologists and urologists. They can find the cause and recommend treatments. Call your local emergency number (such as 911) or go to an emergency room if you suddenly lose control over urine and you have: Difficulty talking, walking, or speaking Sudden weakness, numbness, or tingling in an arm or leg Loss of vision Loss of consciousness or confusion Loss of bowel control  Call your health care provider if you have: Cloudy or bloody urine Dribbling Frequent or urgent need to urinate Pain or burning when you urinate Trouble starting your urine flow Fever  Alternative Names 
 
 Loss of bladder control; Uncontrollable urination; Urination - uncontrollable; Incontinence - urinary Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 References 
 
 Deng DY. Urinary incontinence in women.  Med Clin North Am . 2011;95:101-9. PMID: 21095414  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21095414 . Gerber GS, Brendler CB. Evaluation of the urologic patient: History, physical examination, and urinalysis. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 3. Resnick NM. Incontinence. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Bowel incontinence 
 Stress urinary incontinence 
 Urge incontinence 
 Urinary incontinence - injectable implant 
 Urinary incontinence - retropubic suspension 
 Urinary incontinence - tension-free vaginal tape 
 Urinary incontinence - vaginal sling procedures 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Indwelling catheter care 
 Kegel exercises - self-care 
 Multiple sclerosis - discharge 
 Prostate resection - minimally invasive - discharge 
 Radical prostatectomy - discharge 
 Self catheterization - female 
 Self catheterization - male 
 Sterile technique 
 Transurethral resection of the prostate - discharge  
 Urinary catheters - what to ask your doctor 
 Urinary incontinence products - self-care 
 Urinary incontinence surgery - female - discharge  
 Urinary incontinence - what to ask your doctor 
 Urine drainage bags 
 When you have urinary incontinence 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, Urologist with the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinary Incontinence 
 Browse the Encyclopedia