
 Urine culture - catheterized specimen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Catheterized specimen urine culture is a laboratory test that looks for germs in a urine sample. How the Test is Performed 
 
 This test requires a urine sample. The sample is taken by placing a thin rubber tube (called a catheter) through the urethra into the bladder. A nurse or a trained technician may do this. First, the area around the opening of the urethra is thoroughly washed with a germ-killing (antiseptic) solution. The tube is inserted into the urethra. The urine drains into a sterile container, and the catheter is removed. Rarely, the health care provider may choose to collect a urine sample by inserting a needle directly into the bladder from the abdominal wall and draining the urine. However, this is usually only done in infants or to immediately screen for bacterial infection. The urine is sent to a laboratory. Tests are done to determine if there are germs in the urine sample. Other tests may be done to determine the best medicine to fight the germs. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Do not urinate for at least 1 hour before the test. If you don't have the urge to urinate, you may be instructed to drink a glass of water 15 to 20 minutes before the test. Otherwise, there is no preparation for the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is some discomfort. As the catheter is inserted, you may feel pressure. If you have a  urinary tract infection , you may have some pain when the catheter is inserted. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done: To get a sterile urine sample in a person who cannot urinate on their own If you might have a urinary tract infection If you cannot empty your bladder (urinary retention) Normal Results 
 
 Normal values depend on the test being performed. Normal results are reported as "no growth" and are a sign that there is no infection. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A "positive" or abnormal test means germs, such as bacteria or yeast, are found in the urine sample. This likely means that you have a urinary tract infection or a bladder infection. If there is only a small amount of germs, your health care provider may not recommend treatment. Sometimes, bacteria that do not cause urinary tract infections may be found in the culture. This is called a contaminant. You may not need to be treated. People who have a  urinary catheter in all of the time  may have bacteria in their urine sample, but it does not cause a true infection. This is called being colonized. Risks 
 
 Risks include: Perforation (hole) in the urethra or bladder from the catheter Infection Alternative Names 
 
 Culture - urine - catheterized specimen; Urine culture - catheterization; Catheterized urine specimen culture Images 
 
 
 Female urinary tract 
 Male urinary tract 
 Bladder catheterization, male 
 Bladder catheterization, female 
 References 
 
 Ban KM, Easter JS. Selected urologic problems. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 99. Dean AJ, Lee DC. Bedside laboratory and microbiologic procedures. In: Roberts J, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 67. Hooton TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD, et al. Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults: 2009 International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis.  2010;50(5):625-663. 
 Review Date 4/15/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Urinary Tract Infections 
 Urine and Urination 
 Browse the Encyclopedia