
 Uveitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Uveitis is swelling and irritation of the  uvea . The uvea is the middle layer of the eye. The uvea provides most of the blood supply to the  retina . Causes 
 
 Uveitis can be caused by  autoimmune disorders . These diseases occur when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake. Examples are: Ankylosing spondylitis Psoriasis Reactive arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis Sarcoidosis Ulcerative colitis Uveitis can also be caused by infections such as: AIDS Cytomegalovirus ( CMV) retinitis Herpes zoster infection Histoplasmosis Kawasaki disease Syphilis Toxoplasmosis Tuberculosis Exposure to toxins or injury can also cause uveitis. In many cases, the cause is unknown. The most common form of uveitis involves inflammation the front part of the eye. It is often called iritis because it most often only affects the iris. The iris is the colored part of the eye. In most cases, it occurs in healthy people. The disorder may affect only one eye. It is most common in young and middle-aged people. Posterior uveitis affects the back part of the eye. It involves primarily the  choroid . This is the layer of blood vessels and connective tissue in the middle layer of the eye. This type of uveitis is called choroiditis. If the retina is also involved, it is called chorioretinitis. Another form of uveitis is pars planitis. Changes involve the narrowed area (pars plana) between the colored part of the eye (iris) and the choroid. Pars planitis most often occurs in young men. It is generally not associated with any other disease. However, it may be linked to Crohn disease and possibly multiple sclerosis. Symptoms 
 
 Uveitis can affect one or both eyes. Symptoms may develop rapidly and can include: Blurred vision Dark, floating spots in the vision Eye pain Redness of the eye Sensitivity to light Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will take a complete medical history and do an eye exam. Lab tests may be done to rule out infection or a weak immune system. If you are over age 25 and have pars planitis, your provider will suggest a brain and spine MRI. This will rule out multiple sclerosis. Treatment 
 
 Iritis (anterior uveitis) is most often mild. Treatment may involve: 
   Dark glasses
    
   Eye drops that dilate the pupil to relieve pain
    
   Steroid eye drops
    Pars planitis is often treated with steroid eye drops. Other medicines, including steroids taken by mouth, may be used to help suppress the immune system. Posterior uveitis treatment depends on the underlying cause. It almost always includes steroids taken by mouth. If the uveitis is caused by a body-wide (systemic) infection, you may be given antibiotics. You may also be given powerful anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With proper treatment, most attacks of anterior uveitis go away in a few days to weeks. However, the problem often returns.  Posterior uveitis may last from months to years. It may cause permanent vision damage, even with treatment. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Cataracts Fluid within the retina Glaucoma Irregular pupil Retinal detachment Vision loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Symptoms that need urgent medical care are: Eye pain Reduced vision Prevention 
 
 If you have a body-wide (systemic) infection or disease, treating the condition will prevent uveitis. Alternative Names 
 
 Iritis; Pars planitis; Choroiditis; Chorioretinitis; Anterior uveitis; Posterior uveitis; Iridocyclitis Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Visual field test 
 References 
 
 Goldstein DA, Horsley M, Ulanski LJ II, Tessler HH. Complications of uveitis and their management. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology   2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4, chap 60. Goldstein DA, Patel S, Tessler HH. Classification, symptoms, and signs of uveitis. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology   2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 4, chap 32. Jap A, Chee SP. Pars planitis and other intermediate uveitis. In: Yankoff M, Duker JS, eds.  Ophthalmology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 7.21. Nair UK, Cunningham ET Jr. Uveitis: Diagnostic approach and ancillary analysis. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology   2013 ed . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 20132:vol 4, chap 37. Yanoff M, Cameron DJ. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 423. Read More 
 
 Ankylosing spondylitis 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Cataract - adult 
 Choroid 
 Ciliary body 
 CMV retinitis 
 Glaucoma 
 Histoplasmosis 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Iris 
 Kawasaki disease 
 Macula lutea 
 Psoriasis 
 Pulmonary tuberculosis 
 Reactive arthritis 
 Retina 
 Retinal detachment 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Sclera 
 Shingles 
 Systemic 
 Toxoplasmosis 
 Ulcerative colitis 
 Uvea 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ankylosing Spondylitis 
 Behcet's Syndrome 
 Eye Diseases 
 Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 Vision Impairment and Blindness 
 Browse the Encyclopedia