
 Valley fever 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Valley fever is an infection that occurs when the  spores  of the fungus  Coccidioides immitis  enter your body through the lungs. Causes 
 
 Valley fever is a fungal infection most commonly seen in the desert regions of the southwestern United States, and in Central and South America. You get it by breathing in the fungus from soil. The infection starts in the lungs. It commonly affects people over 60 years of age. Valley fever may also be called coccidioidomycosis. Traveling to an area where the fungus is commonly seen raises your risk for this infection. However, you're more likely to develop a serious infection if you have a weakened immune system due to: Anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy Cancer Chemotherapy Glucocorticoid medicines (prednisone) Heart-lung conditions HIV/AIDS Organ transplant Pregnancy (especially the first trimester) People of Native American, African, or Philippine descent may also get more severe cases. Symptoms 
 
 Most people with valley fever never have symptoms. Others may have cold- or flu-like symptoms or symptoms of pneumonia. If symptoms occur, they typically start 5 to 21 days after exposure to the fungus. Common symptoms include: Ankle, feet, and leg swelling Chest pain  (can vary from mild to severe) Cough, possibly producing blood-tinged phlegm (sputum) Fever and night sweats Headache Joint stiffness  and pain or  muscle aches Loss of appetite Painful, red lumps on lower legs ( erythema nodosum )  Rarely, the infection spreads from the lungs through the bloodstream to involve the skin, bones, joints, lymph nodes, and central nervous system or other organs. This spread is called disseminated coccidioidomycosis. People with this more widespread form may become very sick. Symptoms may also include: Change in mental status Enlarged or draining lymph nodes Joint swelling More severe lung symptoms Neck stiffness Sensitivity to light Weight loss Skin lesions of valley fever are often a sign of widespread (disseminated) disease. With more widespread infection, skin sores or lesions are most often seen on the face.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms and travel history. Tests done for milder forms of this infection include: Blood test to check for coccidioides infection  (the fungus that causes Valley fever) Chest x-ray Sputum culture Sputum smear (KOH test) Tests done for more severe or widespread forms of the infection include: Biopsy of the  lymph node ,  lung , or  liver Bone marrow biopsy Bronchoscopy with lavage Spinal tap  (lumbar puncture) to rule out meningitis Treatment 
 
 If you have a healthy immune system, the disease almost always goes away without treatment. Your provider may suggest bed rest and treatment for flu-like symptoms until your fever disappears. If you have a weak immune system, you may need antifungal treatment with amphotericin B, fluconazole, or itraconazole. Itraconazole is the drug of choice in people with joint or muscle pain. Sometimes surgery is needed to remove the infected part of the lung (for chronic or severe disease). Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the form of the disease you have and your overall health. The outcome in acute disease is likely to be good. With treatment, the outcome is usually also good for chronic or severe disease (although relapses may occur). People with disease that has spread have a high death rate. Possible Complications 
 
 Widespread valley fever may cause: Collections of pus in the lung (lung  abscess ) Scarring of the lung These problems are much more likely if you have a weakened immune system. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of valley fever or if your condition does not improve with treatment. Prevention 
 
 People with immune problems (such as with HIV/AIDS and those who are on drugs that suppress the immune system) shouldn't go to areas where this fungus is found. If you already live in these areas, other measures that can be taken include: Closing windows during dust storms Avoiding activities that involve handling soil, such as gardening Take preventive medicines as prescribed by your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 San Joaquin Valley fever; Coccidioidomycosis, Cocci; Desert rheumatism Images 
 
 
 Coccidioidomycosis - chest x-ray 
 Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray 
 Disseminated coccidioidomycosis 
 References 
 
 Ameen M, Robles WS. Coccidioidomycosis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 45. Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides species). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 267. Galgiani JN. Coccidioidomycosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman-Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 333. Valley Fever (Coccidioidomycosis). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Updated January 28, 2016.  www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/coccidioidomycosis/index.html . Accessed August 26, 2016. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Empyema 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Immunodeficiency disorders 
 Meningitis 
 Pleural effusion 
 Spores 
 
 Review Date 7/31/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Valley Fever 
 Browse the Encyclopedia