
 Ventricular tachycardia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a rapid heartbeat that starts in the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles). Causes 
 
 VT is a pulse rate of more than 100 beats per minute, with at least 3 irregular heartbeats in a row. The condition can develop as an early or late complication of a  heart attack . It may also occur in people with: Cardiomyopathy Heart failure Heart surgery Myocarditis 
 Valvular heart disease
  VT can occur without heart disease. Scar tissue may form in the muscle of the ventricles days, months, or years after a heart attack. This can lead to ventricular tachycardia. VT can also be caused by: Anti-arrhythmic drugs (used to treat an abnormal heart rhythm) Changes in blood chemistry (such as a low potassium level) Changes in pH (acid-base) Lack of enough oxygen "Torsade de pointes" is a form of VT. It is often due to  congenital heart disease  or the use of certain medicines. Symptoms 
 
 You may have symptoms if the heart rate during a VT episode is very fast or lasts longer than a few seconds. Symptoms may include: Chest discomfort  ( angina ) Fainting  (syncope) 
   Lightheadedness or  dizziness Sensation of feeling the heart beat ( palpitations ) Shortness of breath Symptoms may start and stop suddenly. In some cases, there are no symptoms. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will look for: Absent pulse Loss of consciousness Normal or low blood pressure Rapid pulse Tests that may be used to detect ventricular tachycardia include: Holter monitor ECG Intracardiac  electrophysiology study  (EPS) Rhythm monitoring with a loop recorder or device  You may also have  blood chemistries  and other tests.  Treatment 
 
 Treatment depends on the symptoms, and the type of heart disorder. If someone with VT is in distress, they may require: CPR Cardioversion (electric shock) Medicines (such as lidocaine, procainamide, sotalol, or amiodarone) given through a vein  After an episode of VT, steps are taken to further episodes. Medicines taken by mouth may be needed for long-term treatment. However, these drugs may have severe side effects. They are being used less often as other treatments are developed. A procedure to destroy the heart tissue that is causing the abnormal heartbeat (called  ablation ) may be done. An  implantable cardioverter defibrillator  (ICD) may be used. It  is a device that detects any life-threatening, rapid heartbeat. This abnormal heartbeat is called an arrhythmia. If it occurs, the ICD quickly sends an electrical shock to the heart to change the rhythm back to normal. This is called defibrillation. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome depends on the heart condition and symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 Ventricular tachycardia may not cause symptoms in some people. However, it can be deadly. It is a major cause of sudden cardiac death. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a rapid, irregular pulse; faint, or have  chest pain . All of these may be signs of ventricular tachycardia. Prevention 
 
 In some cases, the disorder cannot be prevented. In other cases, it can be prevented by treating heart problems and avoiding certain medicines. Alternative Names 
 
 Wide-complex tachycardia; V tach; Tachycardia - ventricular Images 
 
 
 Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
 References 
 
 Garan H. Ventricular arrhythmias. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 65. Olgin JE, Zipes DP. Specific Arrhythmias: diagnosis and treatment. In: Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 37. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60(14):1297-1313. PMID: 23265327  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23265327 . Read More 
 
 Cardiac ablation procedures  
 Cardiomyopathy 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel 
 Heart attack 
 Heart palpitations 
 Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator 
 Mitral valve prolapse 
 Myocarditis 
 Stimulus 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator - discharge 
 Review Date 5/5/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Arrhythmia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia