
 Ventricular septal defect 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ventricular septal defect is a hole in the wall that separates the right and left ventricles of the heart. Ventricular septal defect is one of the most common congenital (present from birth) heart defects. It may occur by itself or with other congenital diseases. Causes 
 
 Before a baby is born, the right and left ventricles of its heart are not separate. As the fetus grows, a wall forms to separate these 2 ventricles. If the wall does not completely form, a hole remains. This hole is known as a ventricular septal defect, or a VSD. Ventricular septal defect is a common congenital heart defect. The baby may have no symptoms and the hole can close over time as the wall continues to grow after birth. If the hole is large, too much blood will be pumped to the lungs. This can lead to heart failure. The cause of VSD is not yet known. This defect often occurs along with other congenital heart defects. In adults, ventricular septal defects are a rare but serious complication of heart attacks. These holes do not result from a birth defect. Symptoms 
 
 People with ventricular septal defects may not have symptoms. However, if the hole is large, the baby often has symptoms related to heart failure. The most common symptoms include: Shortness of breath Fast breathing Hard breathing Paleness Failure to gain weight Fast heart rate Sweating while feeding Frequent respiratory infections Exams and Tests 
 
 Listening with a stethoscope most often reveals a heart murmur. The loudness of the murmur is related to the size of the defect and amount of blood crossing the defect. Tests may include: Cardiac catheterization  (rarely needed, unless there are concerns of high blood pressure in the lungs) Chest x-ray : looks to see if there is a large heart with fluid in the lungs ECG : shows signs of an enlarged left ventricle Echocardiogram : used to make a definite diagnosis MRI of the heart: used to find out how much blood is getting to the lungs  Treatment 
 
 If the defect is small, no treatment may be needed. But the baby should be closely monitored by a health care provider. This is to make sure that the hole eventually closes properly and signs of heart failure do not occur. Babies with a large VSD who have symptoms related to heart failure may need medicine to control the symptoms and surgery to close the hole. Medicines may include digitalis (digoxin) and diuretics. If symptoms continue, even with medicine, surgery to close the defect with a patch is needed. Some VSDs can be closed with a special device during a cardiac  catheterization , which avoids the need for surgery. However, only certain types of defects can successfully be treated this way. Having surgery for a VSD with no symptoms is controversial. Discuss this carefully with your provider. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many small defects will close on their own. Surgery can repair defects that do not close. In most cases, a person will not have any ongoing medical issues related to the defect if it is closed with surgery or closes on its own. Complications may occur if a large defect is not treated. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Aortic insufficiency  (leaking of the valve that separates the left ventricle from the aorta) Damage to the electrical conduction system of the heart during surgery (causing an irregular heart rhythm) Delayed growth and development ( failure to thrive  in infancy) Heart failure Infective endocarditis (bacterial infection of the heart) Pulmonary hypertension  (high blood pressure in the lungs) leading to failure of the right side of the heart  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Most often, this condition is diagnosed during routine exam of an infant. Call your infant's provider if the baby seems to be having trouble breathing, or if the baby seems to have an unusual number of respiratory infections. Prevention 
 
 Except for VSD that is caused by a heart attack, this condition is always present at birth. Drinking alcohol and using the antiseizure medicines depakote and dilantin during pregnancy may increase the risk for VSDs. Other than avoiding these things during pregnancy, there is no known way to prevent a VSD. Alternative Names 
 
 VSD; Interventricular septal defect; Congenital heart defect - VSD Images 
 
 
 Heart, section through the middle 
 Heart, front view 
 Ventricular septal defect 
 References 
 
 Fraser CD, Carberry KE. Congenital heart disease. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 59. Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, Redington AN. Congenital heart disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 62. Read More 
 
 Aortic insufficiency 
 Arrhythmias 
 Delayed growth 
 Failure to thrive 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Pediatric heart surgery 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pediatric heart surgery - discharge 
 Review Date 10/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Larry A. Weinrauch, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Cardiovascular Disease and Clinical Outcomes Research, Watertown, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Congenital Heart Defects 
 Browse the Encyclopedia