
 Vesicles 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A vesicle is a small fluid-filled blister on the skin. Considerations 
 
 A vesicle is small. It may be as tiny as the top of a pin or up to 5 millimeters wide. A larger blister is called a bulla. In many cases, vesicles break easily and release their fluid onto the skin. When this fluid dries, yellow crusts may remain on the skin surface. Causes 
 
 Many diseases and conditions can cause vesicles. Common examples include: Allergic reactions to drugs Atopic dermatitis ( eczema ) Autoimmune disorders such as  bullous pemphigoid  or  pemphigus Blistering skin diseases including  porphyria  cutanea tarda and  dermatitis herpetiformis Chicken pox Contact dermatitis  (may be caused by poison ivy) Herpes simplex (cold sores,  genital herpes ) Herpes zoster  (shingles) Impetigo Fungal infections Burns Home Care 
 
 It is best to have your health care provider examine any skin rashes, including vesicles. Over-the-counter treatments are available for certain conditions that cause vesicles, including poison ivy and cold sores. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have any unexplained blisters on your skin. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will look at your skin. Some vesicles can be diagnosed simply by how they look.  In many cases, additional tests are needed. The fluid inside a blister may be sent to a lab for closer examination. In particularly difficult cases, a  skin biopsy  may be needed to make or confirm a diagnosis. Treatment will depend on the cause of the vesicles. Alternative Names 
 
 Blisters Images 
 
 
 Bullous pemphigoid, close-up of tense blisters 
 Chigger bite - close-up of blisters 
 Hand, foot, and mouth disease on the soles 
 Herpes simplex - close-up 
 Herpes zoster (shingles) - close-up of lesion 
 Poison ivy on the knee 
 Poison ivy on the leg 
 Vesicles 
 References 
 
 Marks JG, Miller JJ. Vesicles and bullae. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds.  Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 10. Read More 
 
 Bullae 
 Macule 
 Papule 
 Pustules 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Blisters 
 Browse the Encyclopedia