
 Viral arthritis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Viral arthritis is swelling and irritation (inflammation) of a joint caused by a viral infection. Causes 
 
 Arthritis  may be a symptom of many virus-related illnesses. It usually disappears on its own without any lasting effects. It may occur with: Enterovirus Dengue virus Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Human parvovirus Mumps Rubella Alphaviruses  Cytomegalovirus It may also occur after immunization with the rubella vaccine, which is typically given to children. While many people are infected with these viruses or receive the rubella vaccine, only a few people develop arthritis. No risk factors are known. Symptoms 
 
 The main symptoms are  joint pain  and  swelling  of 1 or more joints. Exams and Tests 
 
 A  physical examination  shows  joint inflammation . A blood test for viruses may be performed. In some cases, a small amount of fluid may be removed from the affected joint to determine the cause of the inflammation. Treatment 
 
 Your health care provider may prescribe pain medicines to relieve discomfort. You may also be prescribed anti-inflammatory medicines. If joint inflammation is severe,  aspiration  of fluid from the affected joint may relieve pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The outcome is usually good. Most viral arthritis disappears within several days or weeks when the virus-related disease goes away. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if arthritis symptoms last longer than a few weeks. Alternative Names 
 
 Infectious arthritis - viral References 
 
 Ohl CA, Forster D. Infectious arthritis of native joints. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 105. Vassilopoulos D, Calabrese LH. Rheumatologic aspects of viral infections. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al, eds.  Kelly's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 110. Read More 
 
 Arthritis 
 Hepatitis B 
 Mumps 
 Rubella 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Infectious Arthritis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia