
 Viral pneumonia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pneumonia is inflamed or swollen lung tissue due to infection with a germ. Viral pneumonia is caused by a virus. Causes 
 
 Viral  pneumonia  is more likely to occur in young children and older adults. This is because their bodies have a harder time fighting off the virus than people with a strong immune system. Viral pneumonia is most often caused by one of several viruses: Adenovirus Influenza Parainfluenza Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Measles Serious viral pneumonia is more likely to happen in those with a weakened immune system, such as: Babies who are born too early Children with heart and lung problems People who have HIV/AIDS People receiving chemotherapy for cancer, or other medicines that weaken the immune system People who have had an organ transplant Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of viral pneumonia often begin slowly and may not be severe at first. The most common symptoms of pneumonia are: Cough  (with some pneumonias you may cough up mucus, or even bloody mucus) Fever , which may be mild or high Shaking chills Shortness of breath  (may only occur when you exert yourself) Other symptoms include: Confusion, often in older people Excessive sweating and clammy skin Headache Loss of appetite, low energy, and fatigue Sharp or stabbing chest pain that gets worse when you breathe deeply or cough Fatigue  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms. If the provider thinks you have pneumonia, you will also have a  chest x-ray . This is because the physical exam may not be able to tell pneumonia from other respiratory infections. Depending on how severe your symptoms are, other tests may be done, including: Complete blood count (CBC) CT scan of the chest Blood cultures to check for viruses in the blood Bronchoscopy (rarely needed) Throat and nose swab tests to check for viruses such as the flu Open lung biopsy  (only done in very serious illnesses when the diagnosis cannot be made from other sources) Sputum culture  (to rule out other causes) Measuring  levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics do not treat this type of lung infection. Medicines that treat viruses may work against some pneumonias caused by influenza and the herpes family of viruses. These medicines may be tried if the infection is caught early. Treatment may also involve: Corticosteroid medicines Increased fluids Oxygen Use of humidified air A hospital stay may be needed if you are unable to drink enough and to help with breathing if oxygen levels are too low. People are more likely to be admitted to the hospital if they: Are older than 65 years or are children Are unable to care for themselves at home, eat, or drink Have another serious medical problem, such as a heart or kidney problem Have been taking antibiotics at home and are not getting better Have severe symptoms However, many people can be treated at home. You can take these steps at home: Control your fever with aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen or naproxen), or acetaminophen. DO NOT give aspirin to children because it may cause a dangerous illness called  Reye syndrome . DO NOT take cough medicines without first talking to your provider. Cough medicines may make it harder for your body to cough up sputum. Drink plenty of fluids to help loosen secretions and bring up phlegm. Get a lot of rest. Have someone else do chores. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most cases of viral pneumonia are mild and get better without treatment within 1 to 3 weeks. Some cases are more serious and require a hospital stay. Possible Complications 
 
 More serious infections can result in  respiratory  failure, liver failure, and heart failure. Sometimes, bacterial infections occur during or just after viral pneumonia, which may lead to more serious forms of pneumonia. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if symptoms of viral pneumonia develop or your condition gets worse after starting to improve. Prevention 
 
 Wash your hands often, after blowing your nose, going to the bathroom, diapering a baby, and before eating or preparing food. DO NOT smoke. Tobacco damages your lungs' ability to ward off infection. A drug called palivizumab (Synagis) may be given to children under 24 months old to prevent RSV.  The  flu vaccine , is given each year to prevent pneumonia caused by the flu virus. Those who are older and those with diabetes, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cancer, or weakened immune systems should be sure to get the flu vaccine. If your immune system is weak, stay away from crowds. Ask visitors who have a cold to wear a mask and wash their hands. Alternative Names 
 
 Pneumonia - viral; Walking pneumonia - viral  Images 
 
 
 Lungs 
 Respiratory system 
 References 
 
 Lee FE, Treanor JJ. Viral infections. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 32. Parameswaran GI, Sethi S. Viral pneumonia. In: Spiro SG, Silvestri GA, Agustí A, eds.  Clinical Respiratory Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 25. Read More 
 
 Flu 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Respiratory 
 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Pneumonia in adults - discharge 
 Pneumonia in children - discharge 
 Review Date 8/21/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Pneumonia 
 Browse the Encyclopedia