
 Virilization 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Virilization is a condition in which a female develops characteristics associated with male hormones (androgens), or when a newborn has characteristics of male hormone exposure at birth. Information 
 
 Virilization may be caused by: Excess testosterone production Use of anabolic steroids In newborn boys or girls, the condition may be caused by: Certain medicines taken by the mother during pregnancy Congenital adrenal hyperplasia  in the baby or the mother Other medical conditions in the mother (such as tumors of the ovaries or adrenal glands that release male hormones) In girls who are going through puberty, the condition may be caused by: Polycystic ovary syndrome Certain medicines, or anabolic steroids Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Tumors of the ovaries, or adrenal glands that release male hormones (androgens) In adult women, the condition may be caused by: Certain medicines, or anabolic steroids Tumors of the ovaries or adrenal glands that release male hormones Signs of virilization in a female often depend on the level of testosterone in the body. Low level (common): Thick, dark facial hair in the beard or mustache area Increase in body hair Oily skin or acne Irregular menstrual periods Moderate level (uncommon): Male-pattern baldness Loss of female fat distribution Decreased breast size High level (rare): Enlargement of the clitoris Deepening of the voice Male muscle pattern Tests may include: Blood tests to detect excess testosterone in females CT scan, MRI, or ultrasound to rule out tumors of the ovaries and adrenal glands  Images 
 
 
 Hypothalamus hormone production 
 References 
 
 Bright TM. Hirsutism and virilization. In: McDermott MT, ed.  Endocrine Secrets . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 48. Gooren LJ. The endocrinology of sexual behavior and gender identity. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.  Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 124. Read More 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 Male pattern baldness 
 Testosterone 
 
 Review Date 4/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Brent Wisse, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Nutrition, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia