
 Visual field 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 The visual field refers to the total area in which objects can be seen in the side (peripheral) vision as you focus your eyes on a central point. This article describes the test that measures your visual field. How the Test is Performed 
 
 Confrontation visual field exam : This is a quick and basic check of the visual field. The health care provider sits directly in front of you. You will cover one eye, and stare straight ahead with the other. You will be asked to tell when you can see the examiner's hand. Tangent screen or Goldmann field exam : You will sit about 3 feet (90 centimeters) from a screen with a target in the center. You will be asked to stare at the center object and let the examiner know when you can see an object that moves into your side vision. This exam creates a map of your entire peripheral vision.  Automated perimetry : You sit in front of a concave dome and stare at an object in the middle. You press a button when you see small flashes of light in your peripheral vision. Your responses help determine if you have a defect in your visual field. Automated perimetry is often used to track conditions that may worsen over time. Your provider will discuss with you the type of visual field testing to be done. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 No special preparation is necessary. How the Test will Feel 
 
 There is no discomfort with this test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This eye exam will show whether you have a loss of vision anywhere in your visual field. The pattern of vision loss will help your provider diagnose the cause. Normal Results 
 
 The peripheral vision is normal. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal results may be due to diseases or  central nervous system  (CNS) disorders, such as tumors that damage or press on (compress) the parts of the brain that deal with vision. Other diseases that may affect the visual field of the eye include: Diabetes Glaucoma High blood pressure Macular degeneration Multiple sclerosis Optic glioma Overactive thyroid  (hyperthyroidism) Pituitary gland disorders Retinal detachment Stroke Temporal arteritis Risks 
 
 The test has no risks. Alternative Names 
 
 Perimetry; Tangent screen exam; Automated perimetry exam; Goldmann visual field exam; Humphrey visual field exam Images 
 
 
 Eye 
 Visual field test 
 References 
 
 American Academy of Ophthalmology Preferred Practice Patterns Committee. Preferred Practice Pattern Guidelines. Comprehensive Adult Medical Eye Evaluation -- 2010. one.aao.org/preferred-practice-pattern/comprehensive-adult-medical-eye-evaluation--octobe. Accessed February 26, 2015. Barton JJS, Sexton B. Examination of the visual field. In:  Albert & Jakobiec's Principles & Practice of Ophthalmology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2008:chap 279. Skarf B, Glaser JS, Trick GL. Neuro-ophthalmologic examination: the visual sensory system. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds.  Duane's Ophthalmology . 2013 ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:vol 2, chap 2. Read More 
 
 Central nervous system 
 Diabetes 
 Glaucoma 
 High blood pressure 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Multiple sclerosis 
 Optic glioma 
 Stroke 
 
 Review Date 2/23/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vision Impairment and Blindness 
 Browse the Encyclopedia