
 Vitamin C 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin. It is needed for normal growth and development. Water-soluble vitamins dissolve in water. Leftover amounts of the vitamin leave the body through the urine. That means you need an ongoing supply of such vitamins in your diet. Function 
 
 Vitamin C is needed for the growth and repair of tissues in all parts of your body. It is used to: Form an important protein used to make skin, tendons, ligaments, and blood vessels Heal wounds and form scar tissue Repair and maintain cartilage, bones, and teeth Aid in the absorption of iron  Vitamin C is one of many antioxidants. Antioxidants are nutrients that block some of the damage caused by free radicals. Free radicals are made when your body breaks down food or when you are exposed to tobacco smoke or radiation. The buildup of free radicals over time is largely responsible for the aging process. Free radicals may play a role in cancer, heart disease, and conditions like arthritis.  The body is not able to make vitamin C on its own, and it does not store vitamin C. It is therefore important to include plenty of vitamin C-containing foods in your daily diet. For many years, vitamin C has been a popular remedy for the common cold. Research shows that for most people, vitamin C supplements or vitamin C-rich foods do not reduce the risk of getting the common cold. However, people who take vitamin C supplements regularly might have slightly shorter colds or somewhat milder symptoms. Taking a vitamin C supplement after a cold starts does not appear to be helpful.  Food Sources 
 
 All fruits and vegetables contain some amount of vitamin C. Fruits with the highest sources of vitamin C include: Cantaloupe Citrus fruits and juices, such as orange and grapefruit Kiwi fruit Mango Papaya Pineapple Strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, and cranberries Watermelon  Vegetables with the highest sources of vitamin C include: Broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and cauliflower Green and red peppers Spinach, cabbage, turnip greens, and other leafy greens Sweet and white potatoes Tomatoes and tomato juice Winter squash  Some cereals and other foods and beverages are fortified with vitamin C. Fortified means a vitamin or mineral has been added to the food. Check the product labels to see how much vitamin C is in the product. Cooking vitamin C-rich foods or storing them for a long period of time can reduce the vitamin C content. Microwaving and steaming vitamin C-rich foods may reduce cooking losses. The best food sources of vitamin C are uncooked or raw fruits and vegetables. Exposure to light can also reduce vitamin C content. Choose orange juice that is sold in a carton instead of a clear bottle.  Side Effects 
 
 Serious side effects from too much vitamin C are very rare, because the body cannot store the vitamin. However, amounts greater than 2,000 mg/day are not recommended. Doses this high can lead to stomach upset and diarrhea. Large doses of vitamin C supplementation are not recommended during pregnancy. They can lead to vitamin C deficiency in the baby after delivery.  Too little vitamin C can lead to signs and symptoms of deficiency, including: Anemia Bleeding gums Decreased ability to fight infection Decreased wound-healing rate Dry and splitting hair Easy bruising Gingivitis  (inflammation of the gums) Nosebleeds Possible weight gain because of slowed metabolism Rough, dry, scaly skin Swollen and painful joints Weakened tooth enamel  A severe form of vitamin C deficiency is known as  scurvy . This mainly affects older, malnourished adults. Recommendations 
 
 The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for vitamins reflects how much of each vitamin most people should get each day. The RDA for vitamins may be used as goals for each person. How much of each vitamin you need depends on your age and gender. Other factors, such as pregnancy and illnesses, are also important. The best way to get the daily requirement of essential vitamins, including vitamin C, is to eat a balanced diet that contains a variety of foods. Dietary Reference Intakes for vitamin C: Infants 0 to 6 months: 40* milligrams/day (mg/day) 7 to 12 months: 50* mg/day  *Adequate Intake (AI) Children 1 to 3 years: 15 mg/day 4 to 8 years: 25 mg/day 9 to 13 years: 45 mg/day  Adolescents Girls 14 to 18 years: 65 mg/day Pregnant teens: 80 mg/day Breastfeeding teens: 115 mg/day Boys 14 to 18 years: 75 mg/day  Adults Men age 19 and older: 90 mg/day Women age 19 year and older: 75 mg/day Pregnant women: 85 mg/day Breastfeeding women: 120 mg/day  Smokers or those who are around secondhand smoke at any age should increase their daily amount of vitamin C an additional 35 mg per day. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding and those who smoke need higher amounts of vitamin C. Ask your health care provider what amount is best for you. Alternative Names 
 
 Ascorbic acid; Dehydroascorbic acid Images 
 
 
 Vitamin C benefit 
 Vitamin C deficit 
 Vitamin C source 
 References 
 
 Hemila H, Chalker E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2013: 31;1:CD000980. PMID: 23440782  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23440782 .  Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board.  Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids . National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 2000. PMID 25077263  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25077263 .  Mason JB. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 225. Salwen MJ. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 26. Read More 
 
 Scurvy 
 
 Review Date 2/2/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Vitamin C 
 Browse the Encyclopedia