
 Volvulus - childhood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A volvulus is a twisting of the intestine that can occur in childhood. It causes a blockage that may cut off blood flow. Part of the intestine may be damaged as a result. Causes 
 
 A birth defect called intestinal malrotation can make an infant more likely to develop a volvulus. However, a volvulus can occur without this condition present.  Volvulus due to malrotation occurs most often in the first year of life. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms of volvulus are: Bloody or  dark red stools Constipation  or difficulty releasing stools Distended abdomen Pain or tenderness in the abdomen Nausea or vomiting Shock Vomiting green material  Symptoms are very often severe. The infant in such cases is taken to the emergency room. Early treatment can be critical for survival. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider may order the following tests to diagnose the condition: Barium enema Blood tests to check  electrolytes CT scan Stool guaiac  (shows blood in the stool) Upper GI  series  Treatment 
 
 In some cases,  colonoscopy  can be used to correct the problem. A colonoscopy uses a flexible tube with a light on the end that is passed into the colon (large bowel) through the rectum. Emergency surgery is often needed to repair the volvulus. A surgical cut is made in the abdomen. The bowels are untwisted and the blood supply is restored. If a small segment of bowel is dead from a lack of blood flow (necrotic), it is removed. The ends of the bowel are then sewn together. Or, they are used to form a connection of the intestines to the outside of the body (colostomy or ileostomy). Bowel contents can be removed through this opening.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most of the time, prompt diagnosis and treatment of volvulus leads to a good outcome. If the bowel is dead (necrotic), the outlook is poor. The situation may be fatal, depending on how much of the bowel is dead. Possible Complications 
 
 Possible complications of volvulus are: Secondary peritonitis Short bowel syndrome  (after removal of a large part of the small bowel)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 This is an emergency condition. The symptoms of childhood volvulus develop quickly and the child will become very ill. Get medical attention right away if this happens. Alternative Names 
 
 Childhood volvulus; Abdominal pain - volvulus Images 
 
 
 Volvulus 
 Volvulus - x-ray 
 References 
 
 Bales C, Liacouras CA. Intestinal atresia, stenosis, and malrotation. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW, Schor NF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics . 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 330. Deveney K. The management of colonic volvulus. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:187-190. Peterson MA. Disorders of the large intestine. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 95. Read More 
 
 Abdominal pain 
 Fetal development 
 Intestinal obstruction 
 Peritonitis - secondary 
 Shock 
 Short bowel syndrome 
 
 Review Date 7/22/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist at Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Intestinal Obstruction 
 Browse the Encyclopedia