
 Vomiting blood 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Vomiting blood is regurgitating (throwing up) contents of the stomach that contains blood. Vomited blood may appear either a bright red or dark red color. The vomited material may be mixed with food or it may be blood only. Considerations 
 
 It may be hard to tell the difference between vomiting blood and  coughing up blood  (from the lung) or a nosebleed. Conditions that cause vomiting blood can also cause  blood in the stool . Causes 
 
 The upper GI (gastrointestinal) tract includes the mouth, throat, esophagus (swallowing tube), stomach and the duodenum (first part of the small intestine). Blood that is vomited may come from any of these places. Vomiting that is very forceful or continues for a very long time may cause a tear in the small blood vessels of the throat. This may produce streaks of blood in the vomit. Swollen veins in the walls of the lower part of the esophagus, and sometimes the stomach, may begin to bleed. These veins (called varices) are present in people with severe liver damage. Other causes may include: Bleeding ulcer in the stomach, first part of the small intestine, or esophagus Blood clotting disorders Defects in the blood vessels of the GI tract Swelling, irritation, or inflammation of the esophagus lining (esophagitis) or the stomach lining (gastritis) Swallowing blood (for example, after a nosebleed) Tumors of the mouth, throat, stomach or esophagus Home Care 
 
 Get medical attention right away. Vomiting blood can be a result of a serious medical problem. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or go to the emergency room if vomiting of blood occurs. You will need to be examined right away. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 The provider will examine you and ask questions such as: When did the vomiting begin? Have you ever vomited blood before? How much blood was in the vomit? What color was the blood? (Bright or dark red or like coffee grounds?) Have you had any recent nosebleeds, surgeries, dental work, vomiting, stomach problems, or severe coughing? What other symptoms do you have? What medical conditions do you have? What medicines do you take? Do you drink alcohol or smoke?  Tests that may be done include: Blood work, such as a complete blood count (CBC), blood chemistries, blood clotting tests, and liver function tests Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) (placing a lit tube through the mouth into the esophagus, stomach and duodenum Nuclear medicine scan Rectal examination Tube through the nose into the stomach and then applying suction to check for blood in the stomach X-rays  If you have vomited a lot of blood, you may need emergency treatment. This may include: Administration of oxygen Blood transfusions EGD with application of laser or other modalities to stop the bleeding Fluids through a vein Medicines to decrease stomach acid Possible surgery if bleeding does not stop  Alternative Names 
 
 Hematemesis; Blood in the vomit References 
 
 Goralnick E, Meguerdichian DA. Gastrointestinal bleeding. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Bloody or tarry stools 
 Coughing up blood 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 
 Review Date 1/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Eisner, MD, Private practice specializing in Gastroenterology, and Affiliate Assistant Professor, Florida Atlantic University School of Medicine, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Nausea and Vomiting 
 Browse the Encyclopedia