
 Von Gierke disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Von Gierke disease is a condition in which the body cannot break down glycogen. Glycogen is a form of sugar (glucose) that is stored in the liver and muscles. It is normally broken down into glucose to give you more energy when you need it. Von Gierke disease is also called Type I glycogen storage disease (GSD I). Causes 
 
 Von Gierke disease occurs when the body lacks the protein (enzyme) that releases glucose from glycogen. This causes abnormal amounts of glycogen to build up in certain tissues. When glycogen is not broken down properly, it leads to  low blood sugar . Von Gierke disease is inherited, which means it is passed down through families. If both parents carry a nonworking copy of the gene related to this condition, each of their children has a 25% (1 in 4) chance of developing the disease. Symptoms 
 
 These are symptoms of Von Gierke disease: Constant hunger and need to eat often Easy bruising and nosebleeds Fatigue Irritability Puffy cheeks, thin chest and limbs, and swollen belly Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. The exam may show signs of: Delayed puberty Enlarged liver Gout Inflammatory bowel disease Liver tumors Severe low blood sugar Stunted growth or failure to grow  Children with this condition are usually diagnosed before age 1. Tests that may be done include: Biopsy of liver  or kidney Blood sugar test Genetic testing Lactic acid blood test Triglyceride level Uric acid blood test If a person has this disease, test results will show low blood sugar and high levels of lactate (produced from lactic acid), blood fats (lipids), and uric acid. Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to avoid low blood sugar. Eat frequently during the day, especially foods that contain carbohydrates (starches). Older children and adults may take cornstarch by mouth to increase their carbohydrate intake. In some children, a feeding tube is placed through their nose into the stomach to provide sugars or uncooked cornstarch throughout the night. The tube can be taken out each morning. A medicine to lower uric acid in the blood and decrease the risk for gout may be prescribed. Your provider may also prescribe medicines to treat kidney disease, high lipids, and to increase the cells that fight infection. People with Von Gierke disease cannot properly break down fruit or milk sugar. It is best to avoid these products. Support Groups 
 
 Association for Glycogen Storage Disease:  www.agsdus.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, growth, puberty, and quality of life have improved for people with Von Gierke disease. Those who are identified and carefully treated at a young age can live into adulthood. Early treatment also decreases the rate of severe problems such as: Gout Kidney failure Life-threatening low blood sugar Liver tumors Possible Complications 
 
 These complications can occur: Frequent infection Gout Kidney failure Liver tumors Osteoporosis  (thinning bones) Seizures ,  lethargy , confusion due to low blood sugar Short height Underdeveloped secondary sexual characteristics (breasts, pubic hair) Ulcers of the mouth  or bowel  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have a family history of glycogen storage disease or early infant death due to low blood sugar. Prevention 
 
 There is no simple way to prevent glycogen storage disease. Couples who wish to have a baby may seek genetic counseling and testing to determine their risk for passing on Von Gierke disease. Alternative Names 
 
 Type I glycogen storage disease References 
 
 Laforet P, Weinstein DA, Peter G, Smit A. The glycogen storage diseases and related disorders. In: Saudubray JM, van den Berghe G, Walter JH, eds.  Inborn Metabolic Diseases: Diagnosis and Treatment . 5th ed. New York, NY: Springer; 2012:chap 6. Santos BL, Souza CFM, Schuler-Faccini L, et al. Glycogen storage disease type 1: clinical and laboratory profile.  J de Pediatra . 2014;90(6):572-579. Read More 
 
 Autosomal recessive 
 
 Review Date 4/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Chad Haldeman-Englert, MD, FACMG, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Winston-Salem, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Carbohydrate Metabolism Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia