
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM) is a cancer of the B lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). WM is associated with the overproduction of proteins called IgM  antibodies . Causes 
 
 WM is a result of a condition called lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. This is a cancer of the white blood cells, in which the B or T immune cells start dividing rapidly. The exact cause of too much production of the IgM antibody is unknown. Production of excess IgM causes the blood to become too thick. This is called  hyperviscosity.  It can make it harder for blood to flow through small blood vessels. WM is very rare. Most people with this condition are over 65 years of age. It may also occur in younger people. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of WM may include any of the following: Bleeding of the gums  and nosebleeds Blurred or decreased vision Bluish skin Dizziness Easy bruising of the skin Fatigue Flank pain Headache Mental status changes Numbness , tingling, or burning pain in the hands, feet, fingers, toes, ears, or nose Rash Swollen glands Unintentional weight loss Vision loss  in one eye  Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical examination may reveal a  swollen spleen , liver, and lymph nodes. An eye exam may show enlarged veins in the retina or retinal bleeding (hemorrhages). A  CBC  shows a low number of red blood cells and platelets.  Blood chemistry  shows evidence of kidney disease. A serum viscosity test can tell if the blood has become thick. Symptoms usually occur when the blood is 4 times thicker than normal. A test called  serum protein electrophoresis  shows an increased level of the IgM antibody. Levels are often higher than 3 grams per deciliter (g/dL). Bone lesions are very rare. If they are present, a  bone marrow examination  will show cells that look like both lymphocytes and plasma cells. Additional tests that may be done include: 24-hour  urine protein Total protein Serum globulin electrophoresis Immunofixation in urine T (thymus derived) lymphocyte count Treatment 
 
 The treatment aim is to decrease the symptoms and the risk of developing organ damage. Plasmapheresis removes unwanted substances from the blood. In MW, it removes or reduces the high level of IgM. It also quickly controls the symptoms caused by blood thickening. Medicines may include corticosteroids, a combination of chemotherapy medicines and the monoclonal antibody to B cells, rituximab. People who have a low number of red or white blood cells or platelets may need transfusions or antibiotics. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The average survival is about 5 years. Some people live more than 10 years. In some people, the disorder may produce few symptoms and progress slowly. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications of MW may include: Changes in mental function, possibly leading to  coma  Heart failure Gastrointestinal bleeding Vision problems Hives When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if symptoms of this disorder develop. Alternative Names 
 
 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia; Macroglobulinemia - primary; Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma; Monoclonal macroglobulinemia Images 
 
 
 Waldenstroms 
 Antibodies 
 Hypertensive retinopathy 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute. PDQ adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment. Bethesda, MD. National Cancer Institute. Updated June 1, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/hp/adult-nhl-treatment-pdq . Accessed June 3, 2016. Rajkumar SV. Plasma cell disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 187. Treon SP, Merlini G. Waldenström macroglobulinemia and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.  Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 86. Read More 
 
 Alertness - decreased 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Polycythemia - newborn 
 Vision problems 
 
 Review Date 5/14/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lymphoma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia