
 Watercolor paints - swallowing 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 This article discusses the health problems that might occur when someone swallows watercolor paints. This can happen by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 The substances in watercolor paints that can be harmful are: Man-made or natural pigments (especially cadmium and cobalt) Gum arabic  Note:  Watercolor paints sold for home use are generally considered nonpoisonous. Symptoms 
 
 A person would have to eat several tubes of watercolors before symptoms occur. Home Care 
 
 DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the person swallowed the paint, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Use soap and water to wash any paint off skin and clothes. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 A trip to the emergency room is normally not necessary. However, if the person needs medical help, the provider will measure and monitor their vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through the veins (by IV) Laxatives Medicines to treat symptoms Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is likely because watercolor paints are generally considered nonpoisonous. How well someone does depends on how much paint they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Alternative Names 
 
 Paint - watercolors References 
 
 Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia