
 Wax poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Wax is a greasy or oily solid that melts in heat. This article discusses poisoning due to swallowing large amounts of wax or crayons. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Wax Where Found 
 
 This ingredient is found in: Crayons Candles Canning wax  Note:  This list may not be all-inclusive. Symptoms 
 
 In general, wax is not poisonous. If a child eats a small amount of crayon, the wax will pass through the child's system without causing a problem. However, eating large amounts of wax or crayons can lead to  intestinal obstruction . Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Get the following information: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 If it is necessary to go to the emergency room, the health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated, if needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Recovery is very likely. Alternative Names 
 
 Crayons poisoning References 
 
 Buttaravoli P, Leffler SM. Innocuous injestions. In: Buttaravoli P, Leffler SM, eds.  Minor Emergencies . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 74. 
 Review Date 11/4/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, Attending Physician at FDR Medical Services/Millard Fillmore Suburban Hospital, Buffalo, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia