
 
 
 
 
 WBC count 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
        			A WBC count is a blood test to measure the number of white blood cells (WBCs) in the blood. WBCs help fight infections. They are also called leukocytes. There are  five major types of white blood cells : 
 
 Basophils 
 Eosinophils 
 Lymphocytes (T cells, B cells, and Natural Killer cells) 
 Monocytes 
 Neutrophils  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How the Test is Performed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  blood sample  is needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most of the time, you do not need to take special steps before this test. Tell your health care provider the medicines you are taking, including the ones without a prescription. Some drugs may change the test results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How the Test will Feel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away. 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Why the Test is Performed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 You will have this test to find out how many WBCs you have. Your body produces more WBCs for several reasons. The most common reasons are when you have an infection or allergic reaction. You can also have more WBCs when you are under stress or have inflammation. Some people naturally have a "normal" high or low number of WBCs. An increased number of WBCs can be due to a blood cancer, such as leukemia or lymphoma. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Normal Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The normal number of WBCs in the blood is 4,500 to 11,000 white blood cells per microliter (mcL) or 4.5 to 11.0 x 10^9/L. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your doctor about your test results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOW WHITE BLOOD CELL (WBC) COUNT A low number of WBCs is called leukopenia. A WBC count below 4500 is below normal One type of white blood cell is the neutrophil. This type of white blood cell is important for fighting infections. 
 
 An adult with fewer than 1700 neutrophils in a microliter of blood or 1.7 x 10^9/L has a low white blood cell count. 
 If there are fewer than 500 neutrophils in a microliter of blood or 0.50 x 10^9/L, the risk for infection becomes even higher. 
 
 It may be due to: 
 
 Bone marrow deficiency or failure (for example, due to infection, tumor, or abnormal scarring) 
 Cancer treating drugs, or other medicines (see list below) 
 Certain autoimmune disorders such as lupus 
 Disease of the liver or spleen 
 Radiation treatment for cancer 
 Certain viral illnesses, such as  mononucleosis (mono) 
 Cancers that damage the bone marrow 
 Very severe bacterial infections 
 
 HIGH WHITE BLOOD CELL COUNT A high number of WBCs is called leukocytosis. It may be due to: 
 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Certain drugs or medicines (see list below) 
 Cigarette smoking Not having a spleen, due to spleen removal 
 Infections, most often those caused by bacteria 
 Inflammatory disease (such as rheumatoid arthritis or allergy) 
 Leukemia 
 Severe mental or physical stress Tissue damage (for example, burns) 
 
 There may also be less common reasons for this result. Drugs that may lower your WBC count include: 
 
 Antibiotics 
 Anticonvulsants 
 Anti-thyroid drugs 
 Arsenicals 
 Captopril 
 Chemotherapy drugs 
 Chlorpromazine 
 Clozapine Diuretics 
 Histamine-2 blockers 
 Sulfonamides 
 Quinidine 
 Terbinafine 
 Ticlopidine 
 
 Drugs that may increase WBC counts include: 
 
 Beta adrenergic agonists (for example, albuterol) 
 Corticosteroids Epinephrine 
 Granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
 Heparin 
 Lithium 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Risks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others. Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include: 
 
 Excessive bleeding 
 Fainting or feeling lightheaded 
 Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) 
 Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leukocyte count; White blood cell count 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vajpayee N, Graham SS, Bem S. Basic examination of blood and bone marrow. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.  Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods . 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 1/27/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Yi-Bin Chen, MD, Leukemia/Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basophil (close-up) 
 Formed elements of blood 
 White blood cell count  - series 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blood Count Tests 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Blood Disorders 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Laboratory Tests 
 Read more       
   
 
