
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Unexplained weight loss is a decrease in body weight, when you did not try to lose the weight on your own. Many people gain and lose weight. Unintentional weight loss is loss of 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) OR 5% of your normal body weight over 6 to 12 months or less without knowing the reason. Causes 
 
 A loss of appetite may be due to: Feeling depressed Cancer, even when other symptoms are not present Chronic infection such as AIDS Chronic illness, such as COPD or Parkinson disease Drugs, including chemotherapy drugs, and thyroid medicines Drug abuse such as amphetamines and cocaine Stress or anxiety  Chronic digestive system problems that decrease the amount of calories and nutrients your body absorbs, including: Diarrhea and other infections that last a long time, such as parasites Chronic swelling or infection in the pancreas Removal of part of the small intestine Overuse of laxatives  Other causes such as: Eating disorders, anorexia nervosa that have not been diagnosed yet Diabetes that have not been diagnosed Overactive thyroid gland  Home Care 
 
 Your health care provider may suggest changes in your diet and an exercise program depending on the cause of your weight loss. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if: You or a family member  loses more weight  than is considered healthy for their age and height. You have lost more than 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) OR 5% of your normal body weight over 6 to 12 months or less, and you do not know the reason. You have other symptoms along with the weight loss.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit  
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam and check your weight. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms, including: How much weight have you lost? When did the weight loss begin? Has the weight loss occurred quickly or slowly? Are you eating less? Are you eating different foods? Are you exercising more? Have you been sick? Do you have any dental problems or mouth sores? Do you have more stress or anxiety than usual? Have you vomited? Did you make yourself vomit? Are you  fainting ? Do you have occasional uncontrollable  hunger  with  palpitations , tremor, and  sweating ? Have you had  constipation  or diarrhea? Do you have  increased thirst  or are you drinking more? Are you urinating more than usual? Have you lost any hair? What medicines are you taking? Do you feel sad or depressed? Are you pleased or concerned with the weight loss?  You may need to see a dietitian for nutrition advice.  Alternative Names 
 
 Loss of weight; Losing weight without trying References 
 
 Bistrian BR. Nutritional assessment. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 221. Read More 
 
 Anorexia 
 Endocrine glands 
 Metabolism 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, medical director and director of didactic curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Body Weight 
 Browse the Encyclopedia