
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is a brain disorder due to  vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency . Causes 
 
 Wernicke encephalopathy and Korsakoff syndrome are different conditions that often occur together. Both are due to brain damage caused by a lack of vitamin B1. Lack of vitamin B1 is common in people who have  alcohol use disorder . It is also common in people whose bodies do not absorb food properly (malabsorption). This can sometimes occur with a chronic illness or after weight-loss (bariatric) surgery.  Korsakoff syndrome, or Korsakoff psychosis, tends to develop as Wernicke symptoms go away. Wernicke encephalopathy causes brain damage in lower parts of the brain called the thalamus and hypothalamus. Korsakoff psychosis results from permanent damage to areas of the brain involved with memory. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of Wernicke encephalopathy include: Confusion and loss of mental activity that can progress to coma and death Loss of muscle coordination  (ataxia) that can cause leg tremor Vision changes such as
    abnormal eye movements  (back and forth movements called nystagmus),
    double vision ,  eyelid drooping Alcohol withdrawal Symptoms of Korsakoff syndrome: Inability to form new memories Loss of memory, can be severe Making up stories (confabulation) Seeing or hearing things that are not really there ( hallucinations ) Exams and Tests 
 
 Examination of the nervous/muscular system may show damage to many nerve systems: 
  Abnormal eye movement
   
  Decreased or abnormal reflexes
   
  Fast pulse (heart rate)
   
 Low blood pressure
   
  Low body temperature
 
  Muscle weakness and atrophy ( loss of tissue mass )
   
  Problems with walk (gait) and coordination
   The person may appear poorly nourished. The following tests are used to check a person's nutrition level: Serum albumin  (relates to person's general nutrition) Serum vitamin B1 levels 
  Transketolase activity in red blood cells (reduced in people with thiamine deficiency)
   Liver enzymes may be high in people with a history of long-term alcohol abuse. Other conditions that may cause vitamin B1 deficiency include: HIV/AIDS Cancers that have spread throughout the body Extreme nausea and vomiting during pregnancy ( hyperemesis gravidarum ) Heart failure  (when treated with long-term diuretic therapy) Long periods of intravenous (IV) therapy without receiving thiamine supplements Long-term dialysis Very high thyroid hormone levels ( thyrotoxicosis ) A brain  MRI  may show changes in the tissue of the brain. But if Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is suspected, treatment should start immediately. Usually a brain MRI exam is not needed. Treatment 
 
 The goals of treatment are to control symptoms and to prevent the disorder from getting worse. Some people may need to stay in the hospital early in the condition to help control symptoms. Monitoring and special care may be needed if the person is: In a coma Lethargic Unconscious Vitamin B1 may be given by injection into a vein or a muscle, or by mouth. This may improve symptoms of: Confusion  or  delirium Difficulties with vision and eye movement 
  Lack of muscle coordination
    Vitamin B1 often does not improve loss of memory and intellect that occur with Korsakoff psychosis. Stopping alcohol use can prevent more loss of brain function and damage to nerves. A well-balanced, nourishing diet can help, but it is not a substitute for stopping alcohol use. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome gets steadily worse, and can be life threatening. With treatment, it is possible to control symptoms (such as  uncoordinated movement  and  vision difficulties ). This disorder can also be slowed or stopped. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Alcohol withdrawal Difficulty with personal or social interaction Injury caused by falls Permanent  alcoholic neuropathy Permanent loss of thinking skills Permanent loss of memory Shortened life span When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, or if you have been diagnosed with the condition and your symptoms get worse or return. Prevention 
 
 Not drinking alcohol or drinking in moderation and getting enough nutrition reduce the risk of developing Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. If a heavy drinker will not quit, thiamine supplements and a good diet may reduce the chance of getting this condition, but the risk is not eliminated. Alternative Names 
 
 Korsakoff psychosis; Alcoholic encephalopathy; Encephalopathy - alcoholic; Wernicke's disease; Alcohol use - Wernicke; Alcoholism - Wernicke; Thiamine deficiency - Wernicke Images 
 
 
 Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system 
 References 
 
 Koppel BS. Nutritional and alcohol-related neurologic disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 416. So YT. Deficiency diseases of the nervous system. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SK, eds.  Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 85. Read More 
 
 Alcoholic neuropathy 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Alcohol withdrawal 
 Beriberi 
 Central nervous system 
 Peripheral 
 Thiamin 
 
 Review Date 2/27/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Amit M. Shelat, DO, FACP, Attending Neurologist and Assistant Professor of Clinical Neurology, SUNY Stony Brook, School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse 
 Brain Diseases 
 Browse the Encyclopedia