
 Whipple disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Whipple disease is a rare condition that prevents the small intestines from allowing nutrients to pass into the rest of the body. This is called  malabsorption . Causes 
 
 Whipple disease is caused by infection with a form of bacteria called  Tropheryma whippelii . The disorder mainly affects middle-aged white men. Whipple disease is very rare. Risk factors are unknown. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms most often start slowly. Joint pain is the most common early symptom. Symptoms of gastrointestinal (GI) infection often develop several years later. Other symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Diarrhea Fever Gray to brown skin color Joint pain  in the ankles, knees, elbows, fingers, or other areas Memory loss Mental changes Weight loss  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show: Enlarged lymph glands Heart murmur Swelling in body tissues ( edema )  Tests to diagnose Whipple disease may include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test to check for the bacteria that cause the disease Small bowel  biopsy Upper GI  endoscopy  (viewing the intestines with a flexible, lighted tube in a process called  enteroscopy )  This disease may also change the results of the following tests: Albumin  levels in the blood
    
   Unabsorbed fat in the stools ( fecal fat )
    Intestinal absorption of a type of sugar ( d-xylose absorption )  Treatment 
 
 People with Whipple disease need to take long-term antibiotics to cure any infections of the brain and central nervous system. An antibiotic called ceftriaxone is given through a vein (IV). It is followed by another antibiotic (such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) taken by mouth for up to 1 year. If symptoms come back during antibiotic use, the medicines may be changed. Your provider should closely follow your progress. Symptoms of the disease can return after you finish the treatments. People who remain malnourished will also need to take dietary supplements. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Without treatment, the condition is most often fatal. Treatment relieves symptoms and can cure the disease. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Brain damage Heart valve damage (from  endocarditis ) Nutritional deficiencies Symptoms return (which may be because of drug resistance) Weight loss When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have joint pain that does not go away, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. If you are being treated for Whipple disease, call your provider if: Symptoms get worse or do not improve Symptoms reappear New symptoms develop Alternative Names 
 
 Intestinal lipodystrophy References 
 
 Maiwald M, von Herbay A, Relman DA. Whipple's disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 109. West SG. Systemic diseases in which arthritis is a feature. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 275. Read More 
 
 Malabsorption 
 Weight loss - unintentional 
 
 Review Date 5/11/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Subodh K. Lal, MD, gastroenterologist with Gastrointestinal Specialists of Georgia, Austell, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Malabsorption Syndromes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia