
 Windshield washer fluid 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Windshield washer fluid is a brightly colored liquid made of methanol, a poisonous alcohol. Sometimes small amounts of other toxic alcohols such as ethylene glycol are added to the mixture. Some young children may mistake the fluid for juice, which can lead to accidental poisoning. Even small amounts can cause significant damage. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing windshield washer fluid. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Methanol (methyl alcohol, wood alcohol)  Where Found 
 
 This poison is found in: Windshield washer fluid (used to clean automobile windows)  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of windshield washer fluid poisoning affect many different body systems, including: Airway and lungs: Breathing difficulty No breathing  Eyes Blindness , complete or partial, sometimes described as "snow blindness" Blurred vision Dilation (widening) of the pupils  Heart and blood Low blood pressure  Nervous system Agitated behavior Coma Confusion Difficulty walking Dizziness Headache Seizures  Skin and nails Bluish-colored  lips and fingernails  Stomach and intestines Abdominal pain (severe) Diarrhea Nausea Vomiting, sometimes bloody  Other Fatigue Leg cramps Weakness Yellow skin (jaundice)  Home Care 
 
 Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed  However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available. Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT (computerized tomography, or advanced imaging) scan EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Medicine to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effect of the poison (fomepizole or ethanol) Tube through the nose to remove the remaining poison if the person is seen within 60 minutes of swallowing it  Because rapid removal of methanol is a key to treatment and survival, a kidney machine (renal dialysis) will likely be needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Methanol, the main ingredient in windshield washing fluid, is extremely poisonous. As little as 2 tablespoons (30 milliliters) can be deadly to a child. About 2 to 8 ounces (60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. Blindness is common and often permanent despite medical care. The ultimate outcome depends on how much poison was swallowed and how soon treatment was received. Although many windshield washer fluids are a watered-down form of methanol, they can still be dangerous if swallowed. References 
 
 Barceloux DC, Bond GR, Krenzelok EP, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol poisoning.  J Toxicol Clin Toxicol . 2002;40(4):415-46. PMID: 12216995  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12216995 . Goldfrank LR, ed.  Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies . 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2006. Michael JB. Deadly pediatric poisons: nine common agents that kill at low doses.  Emerg Med Clin North Am . 2004;22(4):1019-50. PMID: 15474780  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15474780 . White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al., eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 155. 
 Review Date 1/25/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia