
 Window cleaner poisoning 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Window cleaner poisoning occurs when someone swallows or breathes in large amounts of window cleaner. This can happen by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Older types of window cleaners may contain: Ammonia Ethanol Isopropyl alcohol Methanol New types of window cleaners are considered safer. Where Found 
 
 Some brand names of window cleaners are: Glass Gleam Sparkle Glass Cleaner Squeegee Off Windex Other window cleaners are also available. Symptoms 
 
 Below are symptoms of window cleaner poisoning in different parts of the body. Most of these occur from older window cleaners that contain the poisonous ingredients listed above. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue  STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns in the food pipe (esophagus) Severe  abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure  that develops rapidly  LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in fumes of the cleaner) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty)  NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) Dizziness Insomnia Irritability Severe brain damage Sleepiness Stupor (decreased level of consciousness) Walking difficulties  SKIN Irritation Burns Holes in the skin or tissues under the skin Home Care 
 
 Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.  If the person swallowed the window cleaner, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in fumes of cleaner, move them to fresh air right away. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.  The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator). Bronchoscopy. Camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs. Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Endoscopy. Camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach. Fluids through the vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well someone does depends on the ingredients of the window cleaner they swallowed, how much they swallowed, and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. References 
 
 Jacobsen D, Hovda KE. Methanol, ethylene glycol, and other toxic alcohols. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 32. Mycyk MB. Toxic alcohols. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 151. White SR. Toxic alcohols. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 155. Zosel AE. General approach to the poisoned patient. In: Adams JG, ed.  Emergency Medicine . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 143. 
 Review Date 10/19/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Browse the Encyclopedia