
 Wine and heart health 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Studies have shown that adults who drink light to moderate amounts of alcohol may be less likely to develop heart disease than those who do not drink at all or are heavy drinkers. However, people who do not drink alcohol should not start just because they want to avoid developing heart disease. Information 
 
 There is a fine line between healthy drinking and risky drinking. DO NOT begin drinking or drink more often just to lower your risk of heart disease. Heavier drinking can harm the heart and liver. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in people who abuse alcohol. Health care providers recommend that if you drink alcohol, drink only light to moderate amounts: For men, limit alcohol to 1 to 2 drinks a day. For women, limit alcohol to 1 drink a day.  One drink is defined as:  4 ounces (118 milliliters, mL) of wine 12 ounces (355 mL) of beer 1 1/2 ounces (44 mL) of 80-proof spirits 1 ounce (30 mL) of 100-proof spirits  Though research has found that alcohol may help prevent heart disease, much more effective ways to prevent heart disease include: Controlling blood pressure  and  cholesterol Exercising  and  following a low-fat, healthy diet Not smoking Maintaining an ideal weight Anyone who has heart disease or heart failure should talk to their provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make heart failure and other heart problems worse. Alternative Names 
 
 Health and wine; Wine and heart disease; Preventing heart disease - wine; Preventing heart disease - alcohol Images 
 
 
 Wine and health 
 References 
 
 Brien SE, Ronksley PE, Turner BJ, Mukamal KJ, Ghali WA. Effect of alcohol consumption on biological markers associated with risk of coronary heart disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of interventional studies.  BMJ . 2011;342:d636. PMID: 21343206  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21343206 .  Mozaffarian D. Nutrition and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 46. United States Department of Agriculture. Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 2010. National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 2010. 
 Review Date 4/11/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Internal review and update on 07/24/2016 by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Alcohol 
 Browse the Encyclopedia