
 Wood's lamp examination 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A Wood's lamp examination is a test that uses ultraviolet (UV) light to look at the skin closely. How the Test is Performed 
 
 You sit in a dark room for this test. The test is usually done in a skin doctor's (dermatologist) office. The doctor will turn on the Wood's lamp and hold it 4 to 5 inches (10 to 12.5 centimeters) from the skin to look for color changes. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 You do not need to take any special steps before this test. Follow your doctor's instructions about not putting creams or medicines on the area of the skin before the test. How the Test will Feel 
 
 You will have no discomfort during this test. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is done to look for skin problems including: Bacterial infections Fungal infections Porphyria Skin coloring changes, such as vitiligo  Not all types of bacteria and fungi show up under the light. Normal Results 
 
 Normally the skin will not shine under the ultraviolet light. What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 A Wood's lamp exam may help your doctor confirm a  fungal infection  or bacterial infection. Your doctor may also be able to learn what is causing any light- or dark-colored spots on your skin. The following things can change the results of the test: Washing your skin before the test (may cause a false-negative result) A room that is not dark enough Other materials that glow under the light, such as some deodorants, make-ups, soaps, and sometimes lint  Risks 
 
 There are no risks with this test. DO NOT look directly into the ultraviolet light. Alternative Names 
 
 Black light test; Ultraviolet light test Images 
 
 
 Wood's lamp test - of the scalp 
 Wood's lamp illumination 
 References 
 
 Gebhard RE. Wood's light examination. In: Pfenninger JL, Fowler GC, eds.  Pfenninger & Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 43. Ruocco E, Baroni A, Donnarumma G, Ruocco V. Diagnostic procedures in dermatology.  Clin Dermatol . 2011;29:548-56. PMID 21855731  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21855731 . Read More 
 
 Porphyria 
 Ringworm of the scalp 
 
 Review Date 12/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Richard J. Moskowitz, MD, Dermatologist in Private Practice, Mineola, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Skin Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia