
 X-ray - skeleton 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A skeletal  x-ray  is an imaging test used to look at the bones. It is used to detect  fractures , tumors, or conditions that cause wearing away (degeneration) of the bone. How the Test is Performed 
 
 The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in the health care provider's office by an x-ray technologist. You will lie on a table or stand in front of the x-ray machine, depending on the bone that is injured. You may be asked to change position so that different x-ray views can be taken. The x-ray particles pass through the body. A computer or special film records the images. Structures that are dense (such as bone) will block most of the x-ray particles. These areas will appear white. Metal and contrast media (special dye used to highlight areas of the body) will also appear white. Structures containing air will be black. Muscle, fat, and fluid will appear as shades of gray. How to Prepare for the Test 
 
 Tell the health care provider if you are pregnant. You must remove all jewelry before the x-ray. How the Test will Feel 
 
 The x-rays are painless. Changing positions and moving the injured area for different x-ray views may be uncomfortable. If the whole skeleton is being imaged, the test usually takes 1 hour or more. Why the Test is Performed 
 
 This test is used to look for: Fractures or broken bone Cancer that has spread to other areas of the body Osteomyelitis  (inflammation of the bone caused by an infection) Bone damage due to trauma (such as an auto accident) or degenerative conditions Abnormalities in the soft tissue around the bone What Abnormal Results Mean 
 
 Abnormal findings include: Fractures Bone tumors Degenerative bone conditions Osteomyelitis Risks 
 
 There is low radiation exposure. X-rays machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned. Alternative Names 
 
 Skeletal survey Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Skeleton 
 Skeletal spine 
 Hand x-ray 
 Skeleton (posterior view) 
 The skeleton (lateral view) 
 References 
 
 Mettler, FA. Skeletal system. In: Mettler FA, ed.  Essentials of Radiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 8. Read More 
 
 Bone tumor 
 Broken bone 
 Cancer 
 Metastasis 
 Osteomyelitis 
 X-ray 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Fractures 
 X-Rays 
 Browse the Encyclopedia