
 Xanthoma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Xanthoma is a skin condition in which certain fats build up under the surface of the skin. Causes 
 
 Xanthomas are common, especially among older adults and people with high blood lipids. Xanthomas vary in size. Some are very small. Others are bigger than 3 inches (7.5 centimeters) in diameter. They appear anywhere on the body. But, they are most often seen on the elbows, joints, tendons, knees, hands, feet, or buttocks. Xanthomas may be a sign of a medical condition that involves an increase in blood lipids. Such conditions include: Certain  cancers Diabetes Hyperlipidemia Inherited metabolic disorders such as  familial hypercholesterolemia Primary biliary cirrhosis Pancreatitis Hypothyroidism Xanthelasma palpebra is a common type of xanthoma that appears on the eyelids. It may occur without any underlying medical condition and may not be linked with a high cholesterol or lipid level. Symptoms 
 
 A xanthoma looks like a yellow to orange bump (papule) with defined borders. There may be several individual ones or they may form clusters. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will examine the skin. Usually, a diagnosis can be made by looking at your skin. A  biopsy  of the growth will show a fatty deposit. You may have blood tests done to check lipid levels, liver function, and for diabetes. Treatment 
 
 If you have a disease that causes increased blood lipids, treating the condition may help reduce the development of xanthomas. If the growth bothers you, your doctor may remove it by surgery or with a laser, but xanthomas may come back after surgery.  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The growth is non-cancerous and painless, but may be a sign of another medical condition.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if xanthomas develop. They may indicate an underlying disorder that needs treatment. Prevention 
 
 Control of blood lipids, including  triglycerides  and cholesterol levels, may help reduce development of xanthomas. Alternative Names 
 
 Skin growths - fatty; Xanthelasma  Images 
 
 
 Xanthoma, eruptive - close-up 
 Xanthoma - close-up 
 Xanthoma - close-up 
 Xanthoma on the knee 
 References 
 
 Habif TP. Cutaneous manifestations of internal disease. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2016:chap 26. White LE, Horenstein MG, Shea CR. Xanthomas. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 248. Read More 
 
 Cancer 
 Diabetes 
 Familial hypercholesterolemia 
 High blood cholesterol levels 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Lipid Metabolism Disorders 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia