
 Zinc oxide overdose 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Zinc oxide is an ingredient in many products. Some of these are certain creams and ointments used to prevent or treat minor skin burns and irritation. Zinc oxide overdose occurs when someone eats one of these products. This can be by accident or on purpose. This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual  overdose . DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. Poisonous Ingredient 
 
 Zinc oxide can cause symptoms if it is eaten, or if its fumes are breathed in. Where Found 
 
 Zinc oxide is used in many different products, including: Zinc oxide ointment Diaper rash  medicines Hemorrhoid  medicines Skin lotions Calamine lotion Caladryl lotion Sunscreen lotion Cosmetics Paint Rubber goods Paper coating Other products may also contain zinc oxide. Symptoms 
 
 Zinc oxide poisoning can cause these symptoms: Chills Cough Fever Diarrhea Mouth and throat irritation Nausea and vomiting Stomach pain Yellow eyes and skin Most of the harmful effects of zinc oxide come from breathing in the gas form of zinc oxide at industrial sites in the chemical or welding industry. This leads to a condition known as "metal fume fever." Symptoms of metal fume fever include a metallic taste in the mouth, fever, headache, chest pain, and shortness of breath. Symptoms start about 4 to 12 hours after breathing in the fumes. Home Care 
 
 If someone swallows a lot of zinc oxide, give them water or milk right away. Do NOT give water or milk if the person is vomiting or has a decreased level of alertness. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the chemical is breathed in (inhaled), move the person to fresh air. Call your health care provider or poison control center. Before Calling Emergency 
 
 Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed Poison Control 
 
 Your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free  Poison Help hotline  (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. What to Expect at the Emergency Room 
 
 Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person’s vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support Chest x-ray EKG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Intravenous fluids (given through a vein) Laxative Medicine to treat symptoms Skin and eye washing if the product touched these tissues and they are irritated or swollen  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Zinc oxide is not very poisonous if it is eaten. Long-term recovery is very likely.
 Alternative Names 
 
 Desitin overdose; Calamine lotion overdose; Zinaderm overdose; Amalox overdose; Azo 22 overdose References 
 
 Blanc PD. Acute responses to toxic exposures. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al, eds.  Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 75. Hall AH, Shannon MW. Other heavy metals. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 75. Holland MG. Pulmonary toxicity. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.  Haddad and Winchester's Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2007:chap 9. Levy SB. Sunscreens. In: Wolverton SE, ed.  Comprehensive Dermatologic Drug Therapy . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 46. 
 Review Date 10/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jacob L. Heller, MD, MHA, Emergency Medicine, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Browse the Encyclopedia