
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a condition in which the body produces too much of the hormone gastrin. Most of the time, a small tumor (gastrinoma) in the pancreas or small intestine is the source of the extra gastrin in the blood. Causes 
 
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by tumors. These growths are most often found in the head of the pancreas and the upper small intestine. The tumors are called gastrinomas. High levels of gastrin cause production of too much stomach acid. Gastrinomas occur as single tumors or several tumors. One-half to two-thirds of single gastrinomas are cancerous (malignant) tumors. These tumors often spread to the liver and nearby lymph nodes. Many people with gastrinomas have several tumors as part of a condition called  multiple endocrine neoplasia type I  (MEN I). Tumors may develop in the pituitary gland (brain) and parathyroid gland (neck) as well as in the pancreas. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Abdominal pain Diarrhea Vomiting blood  (sometimes)  Exams and Tests 
 
 Signs include ulcers in the stomach and small intestine. Tests include: Abdominal CT scan Calcium infusion test Endoscopic  ultrasound Exploratory surgery Gastrin blood level Octreotide scan Secretin stimulation test Treatment 
 
 Drugs called proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, lansoprazole, and others) used for treating this problem. These drugs reduce acid production by the stomach. This helps the ulcers in the stomach and small intestine heal. These medicines also relieve abdominal pain and diarrhea. Surgery to remove a single gastrinoma may be done if the tumors have not spread to other organs. Surgery on the stomach (gastrectomy) to control acid production is rarely needed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The cure rate is low even when it is found early and the tumor removed. However, gastrinomas grow slowly. People with this condition may live for many years after the tumor is found. Acid-suppressing medicines work well to control the symptoms.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Failure to locate the tumor during surgery Intestinal bleeding or hole (perforation) from ulcers in the stomach or  duodenum Severe diarrhea and  weight loss Spread of the tumor to other organs  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have severe abdominal pain that does not go away, especially if it occurs with diarrhea. Alternative Names 
 
 Z-E syndrome; Gastrinoma Images 
 
 
 Endocrine glands 
 References 
 
 Jensen RT, Norton JA. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas and gastrointestinal tract. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.  Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:chap 32. 
 Review Date 11/20/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Frankford-Torresdale Hospital, Aria Health System, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Endocrine Diseases 
 Pancreatic Cancer 
 Pancreatic Diseases 
 Peptic Ulcer 
 Browse the Encyclopedia