
 Ankle pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ankle pain involves any discomfort in one or both ankles. Causes 
 
 Ankle pain is often due to an ankle sprain. An  ankle sprain  is an injury to the ligaments, which connect bones to one another. In most cases, the ankle is twisted inward, causing small tears in the ligaments. The tearing leads to swelling and bruising, making it difficult to bear weight on the joint.  In addition to ankle sprains, ankle pain can be caused by: Damage or swelling of tendons (which join muscles to bone) or cartilage (which cushions joints) Infection in the ankle joint Osteoarthritis ,  gout ,  rheumatoid arthritis ,  Reiter syndrome , and other types of arthritis  Problems in areas near the ankle that can cause you to feel pain in the ankle include: Blockage of blood vessels in the leg Heel pain or injuries Nerve injuries (such as tarsal tunnel syndrome or  sciatica )  Home Care 
 
 Home care for ankle pain depends on the cause and what other treatment or surgery has taken place. You may be asked to: Rest your ankle for several days. Try to NOT put much weight on your ankle. Put on an ACE bandage. You also can buy a brace that supports your ankle. Use  crutches  or a  cane  to help take the weight off a sore or unsteady ankle. Keep your foot raised above the level of your heart. When you are sitting or sleeping, place two pillows under your ankle. Ice the area right away. Apply ice for 10 to 15 minutes every hour for the first day. Then, apply ice every 3 to 4 hours for 2 more days. Try acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or other  pain relievers  made by the store.  As the swelling and pain improve, you may still need to keep extra weight stress off your ankle for a period of time. The injury may take a few weeks to many months to fully heal. Once the pain and swelling are mostly gone, the injured ankle will still be a little weaker and less stable than the uninjured ankle. You will need to start exercises to strengthen your ankle and avoid injury in the future. DO NOT begin these exercises until a health care professional tells you it is safe to start. You will also need to work on your balance and agility.  Other advice your health care provider may give you include: Lose weight if you are overweight. Extra weight puts strain on your ankles. Warm up before exercising. Stretch the muscles and tendons that support the ankle. Avoid sports and activities for which you are not properly conditioned. Make sure that shoes fit you properly. Avoid high-heeled shoes. If you are prone to ankle pain or twisting your ankle during certain activities, use ankle support braces. These include air casts, ACE bandages, or lace-up ankle supports. Work on your balance and do agility exercises.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the hospital if: You have severe pain even when you are NOT bearing weight. You suspect a broken bone (the joint looks deformed and you cannot put any weight on the leg). You can hear a popping sound and have immediate pain of the joint.  Call your health care provider if: Swelling does not go down within 2 to 3 days You have symptoms of infection. The area becomes red, more painful, or warm, or you have a fever over 100°F (37.7°C) The pain does not go away after several weeks Other joints are also involved You have a history of arthritis and are having new symptoms  Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - ankle Images 
 
 
 Ankle sprain swelling 
 Ankle sprain 
 Sprained ankle 
 References 
 
 Abu-Laban RV, Rose NGW. Ankle and foot. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2013:chap 58. Irwin TA. Tendon injuries of the foot and ankle. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 117. Molloy A, Selvan D. Ligamentous injuries of the foot and ankle. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 116. Osborne MD and Esser SM. Chronic ankle instability. In: Frontera, WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD, eds.  Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 85. Price MD, Chiodo CP. Foot and ankle pain. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 49.  
 Review Date 3/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, assistant professor, chief, sports medicine and shoulder service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Ankle Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia