
 Foot pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Pain or discomfort can be felt anywhere in the foot. You may have pain in the heel, toes, arch, instep, or bottom of foot (sole). Causes 
 
 Foot pain may be due to: Aging Being on your feet for long periods of time Being overweight A foot deformity that you were born with or develops later Injury Shoes that fit poorly or do not have much cushioning Too much walking or other sports activity Trauma  The following can cause foot pain: Arthritis  and  gout . Common in the big toe, which becomes red, swollen, and very tender. Broken bones . Bunions . A bump at the base of the big toe from wearing narrow-toed shoes or from abnormal bone alignment. Calluses and corns . Thickened skin from rubbing or pressure. Calluses are on the balls of the feet or heels. Corns appear on the top of your toes. Hammer toes . Toes that curl downward into a claw-like position. Fallen arches . Also called flat feet. Morton neuroma . A thickening of nerve tissue between the toes. Nerve damage from diabetes. Plantar fasciitis . Plantar warts. Sores on the soles of your feet due to pressure. Sprains . Stress fracture. Nerve problems.  Home Care 
 
 The following steps may help relieve your foot pain: Apply ice to reduce pain and swelling. Keep your painful foot elevated as much as possible. Reduce your activity until you feel better. Wear shoes that fit your feet and are right for the activity you are doing. Wear foot pads to prevent rubbing and irritation. Use an over-the-counter pain medicine, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen. (Talk to your health care provider first if you have a history of ulcer or liver problems.)  Other home care steps depend on what is causing your foot pain. The following steps can prevent foot problems and foot pain: Wear comfortable, properly fitting shoes, with good arch support and cushioning. Wear shoes with plenty of room around the ball of your foot and toes, a wide toe box. Avoid narrow-toed shoes and high heels. Wear sneakers as often as possible, especially when walking. Replace running shoes frequently. Warm up and cool down when exercising. Always stretch first. Increase your amount of exercise slowly over time to avoid putting excessive strain on your feet. Lose weight if you need to. Learn exercises to strengthen your feet and avoid pain. This can help flat feet and other potential foot problems.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if: You have sudden, severe foot pain Your foot pain began following an injury, especially if your foot is bleeding or bruising, or you cannot put weight on it You have redness or swelling of the joint, an open sore or ulcer on your foot, or a fever You have pain in your foot and have diabetes or a disease that affects blood flow Your foot does not feel better after using at-home treatments for 1 to 2 weeks What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will do a physical exam. Your provider will ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. X-rays or MRI may be done to help your doctor diagnose the cause of your foot pain. Treatment depends on the exact cause of the foot pain. Treatment may include: A splint or a cast, if you broke a bone Shoes that protect your feet Removal of plantar warts, corns, or calluses by a foot specialist Orthotics, or shoe inserts Physical therapy to relieve tight or overused muscles Foot surgery Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - foot Images 
 
 
 Normal foot x-ray 
 Leg skeletal anatomy 
 References 
 
 Irwin TA. Tendon injuries of the foot and ankle. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 117. Kadakia AR. Heel pain and plantar fasciitis: hindfoot conditions. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 119. Molloy A, Selvan D. Ligamentous injuries of the foot and ankle. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 116. Perera A, Mason L. Forefoot problems in sport. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 120. Price MD, Chiodo CP. Foot and ankle pain. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.  Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 49. Silverstein JA, Moeller JL, Hutchinson MR. Common issues in orthopedics. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds.  Textbook of Family Medicine . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 30. Read More 
 
 Ankle pain 
 Foot pain 
 Morton neuroma 
 
 Review Date 3/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Foot Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia