
 Bone pain or tenderness 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Bone pain or tenderness is aching or other discomfort in one or more bones. Considerations 
 
 Bone pain is less common than  joint pain  and  muscle pain . The source of bone pain may be clear, such as from a  fracture  following an accident. Other causes, such as cancer that spreads ( metastasizes ) to the bone, may be less obvious. Causes 
 
 Bone pain can occur with injuries or conditions such as: Cancer in the bones (primary malignancy) Cancer that has spread to the bones (metastatic malignancy) Disruption of blood supply (as in  sickle cell anemia ) Infected bone ( osteomyelitis ) Infection Injury (trauma) Leukemia Loss of mineralization ( osteoporosis ) Overuse Toddler fracture (a type of stress fracture that occurs in toddlers)  Home Care 
 
 See your health care provider if you have bone pain and do not know why it is occurring. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Take any bone pain or tenderness very seriously. Contact your provider if you have any unexplained bone pain. What toExpect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will ask you about your medical history and do a physical exam. Some questions that may be asked include: Where is the pain located? How long have you had pain and when did it start? Is the pain getting worse? Do you have any other symptoms? You may have the following tests: Blood studies (such as  CBC ,  blood differential ) Bone x-rays , including a bone scan CT  or  MRI  scan Hormone level  studies Pituitary and adrenal gland function studies Urine studies  Depending on the cause of the pain, your provider may prescribe: Antibiotics Anti-inflammatory medicines Hormones Laxatives (if you develop constipation during prolonged bed rest) Pain relievers If pain is related to thinning bones, you may need treatment for  osteoporosis . Alternative Names 
 
 Aches and pains in bones; Pain - bones Images 
 
 
 Skeleton 
 References 
 
 McCormack RG, Lopez CA. Commonly encountered fractures in sports medicine. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.  DeLee and Drez's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.  4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 13. Weber TJ. Osteoporosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 243. Whyte MP. Osteonecrosis, osteosclerosis/hyperostosis, and other disorders of bone. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 248. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Joint pain 
 Metastasis 
 Muscle aches 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Diseases 
 Bone Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia