
 Facial trauma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Facial trauma is an injury of the face. It may include the facial bones such as the upper jaw bone (maxilla). Causes 
 
 Facial injuries can affect the upper jaw, lower jaw, cheek, nose, eye socket, or forehead. They may be caused by blunt force or be the result of a wound.  Common causes of injury to the face include: Car and motorcycle crashes Wounds  Sports injuries Violence  Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Changes in feeling over the face Deformed or uneven face or facial bones Difficulty breathing through the nose due to swelling and bleeding Double vision Missing teeth Swelling or bruising around the eyes that may cause vision problems  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam, which may show: Bleeding from the nose, eyes, or mouth Nasal blockage Breaks in the skin (lacerations) Bruising around the eyes or widening of the distance between the eyes, which may mean injury to the bones between the eye sockets Changes in vision or the movement of the eyes Improperly aligned upper and lower teeth The following may suggest bone fractures: Abnormal feelings on the cheek Irregularities of the face that can be felt by touching Movement of the upper jaw when the head is still A  CT scan of the head  and bones of the face may be done. Treatment 
 
 Surgery is done if the injury prevents normal functioning or causes a major deformity. The goal of treatment is to: Control bleeding Create a clear airway Treat the fracture and fix broken bone segments  Prevent scars, if possible Prevent long-term double vision or sunken eyes or cheek bones Rule out other injuries Treatment should be done as soon as possible if the person is stable and does not have a neck fracture. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Most people do very well with proper treatment. More surgery may be needed in 6 to 12 months to correct changes in appearance.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Bleeding Uneven face Infection Brain and nervous system problems Numbness or weakness Loss of vision or double vision  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a severe injury to your face. Prevention 
 
 Wear seat belts while driving. Use protective head gear when doing work or activities that could injure the face. Alternative Names 
 
 Maxillofacial injury; Midface trauma; Facial injury; LeFort injuries References 
 
 Kellman RM. Maxillofacial trauma. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 23. Mayersak RJ. Facial trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 42. 
 Review Date 8/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Sumana Jothi MD, specialist in laryngology, Clinical Instructor UCSF Otolaryngology, NCHCS VA, SFVA, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Facial Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia