
 Multiple myeloma 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Multiple myeloma is a blood cancer that starts in the plasma cells in the bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft, spongy tissue found inside most bones. It helps make blood cells.  Plasma cells help your body fight infection by producing proteins called  antibodies . With multiple myeloma, plasma cells grow out of control in the bone marrow and form tumors in the areas of solid bone. The growth of these bone tumors weakens the solid bones. It also makes it harder for the bone marrow to make healthy blood cells and platelets. Causes 
 
 The cause of multiple myeloma is unknown. Past treatment with radiation therapy increases the risk for this type of  cancer . Multiple myeloma mainly affects older adults. Symptoms 
 
 Multiple myeloma most commonly causes: Low red blood cell count ( anemia ), which can lead to fatigue and shortness of breath Low white blood cell count, which makes you more likely to get infections Low platelet count, which can lead to abnormal bleeding As the cancer cells grow in the bone marrow, you may have bone pain, most often in the ribs or back. The cancer cells can weaken bones. As a result: You may develop broken bones (bone fractures) just from doing normal activities. If cancer grows in the spine bones, it can press on the nerves. This can lead to  numbness  or weakness of the arms or legs. Exams and Tests 
 
 Blood tests can help diagnose this disease. These tests include: Albumin level Calcium level Total protein level Kidney function blood tests Complete blood count  (CBC) Blood and urine tests to identify proteins, or antibodies ( immunofixation ) Blood tests to quickly and accurately measure the specific level of certain proteins called immunoglobulins ( nephelometry )  Bone x-rays  may show fractures or hollowed out areas of bone. If your doctor suspects this type of cancer, a  bone marrow biopsy  will be performed. Bone density testing may show bone loss. Treatment 
 
 People who have mild disease or in whom the diagnosis is not certain are usually closely monitored. Some people have a form of multiple myeloma that grows slowly (smoldering myeloma), which takes years to cause symptoms. 
Various types of medicines are used to treat multiple myeloma. They are most often given to prevent complications such as bone fractures and kidney damage. Radiation therapy  may be used to relieve bone pain or to shrink a tumor that is pushing on the spinal cord. Two types of  bone marrow transplants  may be used: Autologous bone marrow or stem cell transplantation is performed using a person's own stem cells. Allogeneic transplant uses someone else's stem cells. This treatment has serious risks, but may offer the chance of a cure.  You and your healthcare provider may need to manage other concerns during your treatment, including: Having chemotherapy at home Managing your pets Bleeding problems Dry mouth Eating enough calories Safe eating  during cancer treatment Support Groups 
 
 You can ease the stress of illness by joining a  cancer support group . Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Outlook depends on the person's age and the stage of disease. In some cases, the disease progresses very rapidly. In other cases, it takes years for symptoms to appear. In general, multiple myeloma is treatable, but only in rare cases can it be cured. Possible Complications 
 
 Kidney failure  is a frequent complication. Others may include: Bone fractures High level of calcium in the blood, which can be very dangerous Increased chances for infection, especially in the lungs Weakness or loss of movement due to tumor pressing on spinal cord When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your doctor if you have multiple myeloma and you develop an infection, or numbness, loss of movement, or loss of sensation. Alternative Names 
 
 Plasma cell dyscrasia; Plasma cell myeloma; Malignant plasmacytoma; Plasmacytoma of bone; Myeloma - multiple Images 
 
 
 Cryoglobulinemia - of the fingers 
 Immune system structures 
 Antibodies 
 References 
 
 National Cancer Institute: PDQ plasma cell neoplasms (including multiple myeloma) treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated February 6, 2016.  www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/myeloma/healthprofessional . Accessed March 17, 2016. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: multiple myeloma. Version 3.2016.  www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/myeloma.pdf . Accessed March 17, 2016. Rajkumar SV, Dispenzieri A. Multiple myeloma and related disorders. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.  Abeloff's Clinical Oncology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 104. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Anemia 
 Bone marrow transplant 
 Cancer 
 Muscle function loss 
 Numbness and tingling 
 Platelet count 
 Pneumonia - adults (community acquired) 
 Spinal cord trauma 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Bone marrow transplant - discharge 
 Review Date 2/1/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Multiple Myeloma 
 Browse the Encyclopedia