
 Nose fracture 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A nose fracture is a break in the bone or cartilage over the bridge, or in the sidewall or septum (structure that divides the nostrils) of the nose. Considerations 
 
 A fractured nose is the most common  fracture  of the face. It usually occurs after an injury and often occurs with other fractures of the face. Sometimes a blunt injury can cause the wall dividing the nostrils to separate. Nose injuries and neck injuries are often seen together. A blow that is forceful enough to injure the nose may be hard enough to injure the neck. Serious nose injuries cause problems that need a health care provider's attention right away. For example, damage to the cartilage can cause a collection of blood to form inside the nose. If this blood is not drained right away, it can cause an  abscess  or a permanent deformity that blocks the nose. It may lead to tissue death and cause the nose to collapse. For minor nose injuries, the health care provider may want to see the person within the first week after the injury to see if the nose has moved out of its normal shape. Sometimes, surgery may be needed to correct a nose or septum that has been bent out of shape by an injury. Symptoms 
 
 Blood coming from the nose Bruising  around the eyes Difficulty breathing through the nose Misshapen appearance (may not be obvious until the swelling goes down) Pain Swelling The bruised appearance usually disappears after 2 weeks. First Aid 
 
 Try to stay calm. Breathe through your mouth and lean forward in a sitting position to keep blood from going down the back of your throat. Apply cold compresses to your nose to reduce swelling. If possible, hold the compress so that there isn't too much pressure on the nose. To help relieve pain, try acetaminophen (Tylenol).  DO NOT 
 
 Do NOT try to straighten a broken nose. Do NOT move the person if there is reason to suspect a head or  neck injury . When to Contact a Medical Profesional 
 
 Get medical help right away if: Bleeding will not stop Clear fluid keeps draining from the nose You suspect a  blood clot  in the septum You suspect a neck or  head injury The nose looks deformed or out of its usual shape The person is having  difficulty breathing Prevention 
 
 Wear protective headgear while playing contact sports, or riding bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, or rollerblades. Use seat belts and appropriate car seats when driving. Alternative Names 
 
 Fracture of the nose; Broken nose; Nasal fracture; Nasal bone fracture; Nasal septal fracture  Images 
 
 
 Nasal fracture 
 References 
 
 
Chegar BE, Tatum SA III. Nasal fractures. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund LJ, et al, eds.  Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.  5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2010:chap 35. Mayersak RJ. Facial trauma. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.  8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 42. Riviello RJ. Otolaryngologic procedures. In: Roberts JR, ed.  Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine.  6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 63. 
 Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 
 Review Date 11/3/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, BS, Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Nose Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia