
 Osteonecrosis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteonecrosis is bone death caused by poor blood supply. It is most common in the hip and shoulder, but can affect other large joints such as the knee, elbow, wrist and ankle. Causes 
 
 Osteonecrosis occurs when part of the bone does not get blood and dies. After a while, the bone can collapse. If osteonecrosis is not treated, the joint deteriorates, leading to severe arthritis. Osteonecrosis can be caused by disease or by severe trauma, such as a  fracture  or  dislocation , that affects the blood supply to the bone. Osteonecrosis can also occur without trauma or disease. This is called idiopathic -- meaning it occurs without any known cause. The following are possible causes: Using oral or intravenous steroids Excessive alcohol use Sickle cell disease Radiation therapy Gaucher disease Decompression sickness from a lot of deep sea diving Dislocation or fractures around a joint Clotting disorders HIV or taking HIV drugs  When osteonecrosis occurs in the shoulder joint, it is usually due to long-term treatment with steroids or a history of trauma to the shoulder. Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease  is a similar condition seen in children and adolescents. Symptoms 
 
 There are no symptoms in the early stages. As bone damage worsens, you may have the following symptoms: Pain in the joint that may increase over time and becomes severe if the bone collapses Pain that occurs even at rest Limited range of motion Groin pain, if the hip joint is affected Limping, if the condition occurs in or below the hip Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider will do a physical exam to find out if you have any diseases or conditions that may affect your bones. You will be asked about your symptoms and medical history. Be sure to let your provider know about any medicines or vitamin supplements you are taking, even over-the-counter medicine. After the exam, your provider will order one or more of the following tests: X-ray MRI Bone scan CT scan Treatment 
 
 If your provider knows the cause of osteonecrosis, part of the treatment will be aimed at the underlying condition. For example, if a blood clotting disorder is the cause, treatment will consist, in part, of clot-dissolving medicine. If the condition is caught early, you will take pain relievers and limit use of the affected area. This may include using crutches if your hip, knee, or ankle is affected. You may need to do range-of-motion exercises. Nonsurgical treatment can often slow the progression of osteonecrosis, but most people will need surgery. Surgical options include: A  bone graft A bone graft along with its blood supply (vascularized bone graft) Cutting the bone and changing its alignment to relieve stress on the bone or joint (osteotomy) Total joint replacement Removing part of the inside of the bone (core decompression) to relieve pressure and allow new blood vessels to form Support Groups 
 
 You can find more information and support resources at the following organizations: National Osteonecrosis Foundation --  www.nonf.org Avascular Necrosis / Osteonecrosis Support Group International Association --  osteonecrosisavnsupport.org The Arthritis Foundation --  www.arthritis.org Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 How well you do depends on the following: The cause of the osteonecrosis Stage of the disease when it was diagnosed Amount of bone involved Your age and overall health  Outcome can vary from complete healing to permanent damage in the affected bone. Possible Complications 
 
 Advanced osteonecrosis can lead to  osteoarthritis  and permanent decreased mobility. Severe cases may require joint replacement. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms. Prevention 
 
 Many cases of osteonecrosis do not have a known cause, so prevention may not be possible. In some cases, you can reduce your risk by doing the following: Avoid drinking excessive amounts of alcohol. When possible, avoid high doses and long-term use of corticosteroids. Dive safely to avoid decompression sickness. Alternative Names 
 
 Avascular necrosis; Bone infarction; Ischemic bone necrosis; AVN; Aseptic necrosis Images 
 
 
 Aseptic necrosis 
 References 
 
 McAlindon T, Ward RJ. Osteonecrosis. In: Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.  Rheumatology . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2015:chap 184. Whyte MP. Osteonecrosis, osteosclerosis/hyperstosis, and other disorders of the bone. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine.  25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 248. Read More 
 
 Broken bone 
 Dislocation 
 Gaucher disease 
 Hip joint replacement 
 Knee joint replacement 
 Radiation therapy 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 
 Review Date 5/9/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Assistant Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Osteonecrosis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia