
 Osteomyelitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Osteomyelitis is a bone infection. It is mainly caused by bacteria or other germs. Causes 
 
 Bone infection is most often caused by bacteria. But it can also be caused by fungi or other germs. When a person has osteomyelitis: 
   Bacteria or other germs may spread to a bone from infected skin, muscles, or tendons next to the bone. This may occur under a skin sore.
    
   The infection can start in another part of the body and spread to the bone through the blood.
    
   The infection can also start after bone surgery. This is more likely if the surgery is done after an injury or if metal rods or plates are placed in the bone.
    In children, the  long bones  of the arms or legs are most often involved. In adults, the feet, spine bones (vertebrae), and hips (pelvis) are most commonly affected. Risk factors are: Diabetes Hemodialysis Poor blood supply Recent injury Use of injected illegal drugs  Surgery involving bones Weakened immune system Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of osteomyelitis are not specific and vary with age. Main symptoms include: Bone pain Excessive sweating Fever  and chills General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling ( malaise ) Local  swelling , redness, and warmth Open wound that may show pus Pain at the site of infection Exams and Tests 
 
 A physical exam shows bone tenderness and possible swelling and redness in the area around the bone. Tests may include: Blood cultures Bone biopsy  (the sample is cultured and examined under a microscope) Bone scan Bone x-ray Complete blood count ( CBC ) C-reactive protein ( CRP ) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) MRI  of the bone Needle  aspiration  of the area of the affected bones  Treatment 
 
 The goal of treatment is to get rid of the infection and reduce damage to the bone and surrounding tissues. Antibiotics are given to destroy the bacteria causing the infection:  You may receive more than 1 antibiotic at a time. Antibiotics are taken for at least 4 to 6 weeks, often  at home through an IV  (intravenously, meaning through a vein).  Surgery may be needed to remove dead bone tissue if the above methods fail: If there are metal plates near the infection, they may need to be removed. The open space left by the removed bone tissue may be filled with  bone graft  or packing material. This promotes the growth of new bone tissue.  Infection that occurs after joint replacement may require surgery. This is done to to remove the replaced joint and infected tissue in the area. A new  prosthesis  may be implanted in the same operation. More often, doctors wait until the infection has gone away. If you have  diabetes , it will need to be well controlled. If there are  problems with blood supply  to the infected area, such as the foot, surgery may be needed to improve blood flow and get rid of the infection. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 With treatment, the outcome for acute osteomyelitis is often good. The outlook is worse for those with long-term (chronic) osteomyelitis. Symptoms may come and go for years, even with surgery. Amputation may be needed, especially in people with diabetes or poor blood circulation. The outlook for people with an infection of a prosthesis depends partly on: The person's health The type of infection Whether the infected prosthesis can be safely removed  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you: Develop symptoms of osteomyelitis Have osteomyelitis that continues even with treatment  Alternative Names 
 
 Bone infection Images 
 
 
 X-ray 
 Skeleton 
 Osteomyelitis 
 References 
 
 Berbari EF, Steckelberg JM, Osmon DR. Osteomyelitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 106. Matteson EL, Osmon DR. Infections of bursae, joints, and bones. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 272. Raukar NP, Zink BJ. Bone and joint infections. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 136. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Acute 
 Chronic 
 Diabetes 
 Long bones 
 Substance use 
 
 Patient Instructions 
 
 Osteomyelitis - discharge 
 Review Date 3/13/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bone Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia