
 Ribcage pain 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ribcage pain includes any pain or discomfort in the area of the ribs. Considerations 
 
 With a broken rib, the pain is worse when bending and twisting the body. This movement does not cause the pain in someone who has  pleurisy  (swelling of the lining of the lungs) or muscle spasms. Causes 
 
 Ribcage pain may be caused by any of the following: Bruised, cracked, or fractured rib Inflammation of cartilage near the breastbone ( costochondritis ) Osteoporosis Pleurisy (the pain is worse when breathing deeply)  Home Care 
 
 Rest and not moving the area (immobilization) are the best cures for a ribcage  fracture . Follow your health care provider's instructions for treating the cause of ribcage pain. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call for an appointment with your provider if you do not know the cause of the pain, or if it does not go away. What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider may perform a physical examination. You'll likely be asked about your symptoms, such as when the pain started, its location, the kind of pain you're having, and what makes it worse.  Tests that may be ordered include: Bone scan  (if there is a known history of  cancer  or it is highly suspected) Chest x-ray Your provider may prescribe treatment for your ribcage pain. Treatment depends on the cause. Alternative Names 
 
 Pain - ribcage Images 
 
 
 Rib 
 References 
 
 Gottschalk A, Ochroch EA. Thoracic pain. In: McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turk DC.  Wall & Melzack's Textbook of Pain . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:chap 52. Reynolds JH, Jones H. Thoracic trauma and related topics. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.  Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging.  6th ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Churchill-Livingstone; 2015:chap 17. Read More 
 
 Chest pain 
 Pleurisy 
 
 Review Date 1/31/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chest Injuries and Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia