
 Point tenderness - abdomen 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Abdominal point tenderness is the pain you feel when pressure is placed over a certain part of the belly area (abdomen). Considerations 
 
 The abdomen is an area of the body a doctor can easily examine by touch. The health care provider can feel growths and organs in the belly area and find where you feel pain. Abdominal tenderness can be mild to severe. Rebound tenderness occurs when the tissue that lines the abdominal cavity (the peritoneum) is irritated, inflamed, or infected. This is called  peritonitis . Causes 
 
 Causes include: Abdominal abscess Appendicitis Certain types of  hernias Meckel's diverticulum Ovarian torsion (twisted Fallopian tube)  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Get emergency medical help right away if you have abdominal point tenderness.  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your health care provider will examine you and gently push on places on your belly. People with peritonitis will often tense the abdominal muscles when the area is touched. This is called guarding. The provider will note any point tenderness. The location of the tenderness can indicate the problem that is causing it. For example, if you have appendicitis, you will have tenderness when a certain place is touched. This spot is called McBurney's point. The provider will also ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. These may include: When did the symptoms start? Is this the first time you have had such discomfort? If not, when does the discomfort tend to occur? Are you having other symptoms, such as  constipation ,  diarrhea , fainting,  vomiting , or fever?  You may need to have the following tests:  Abdominal x-ray Abdominal CT scan  (occasionally) Blood work, such as a  complete blood count In some cases, you may need surgery right away. This may involve an  exploratory laparotomy  or an emergency  appendectomy . Alternative Names 
 
 Abdominal tenderness Images 
 
 
 Anatomical landmarks, front view 
 Appendix 
 References 
 
 Mcquaid K. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 134. Squires RA, Postier RG. Acute abdomen. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.  Sabiston Textbook of Surgery . 19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 47. Read More 
 
 Appendicitis 
 Peritonitis 
 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abdominal Pain 
 Browse the Encyclopedia