
 Acute kidney failure 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Acute kidney failure is the rapid (less than 2 days) loss of your kidneys' ability to remove waste and help balance fluids and  electrolytes  in your body.  Causes 
 
 There are many possible causes of kidney damage. They include: Acute tubular necrosis ( ATN ) Autoimmune kidney disease Blood clot from cholesterol (cholesterol emboli) Decreased blood flow due to very low blood pressure, which can result from  burns ,  dehydration , hemorrhage, injury,  septic shock , serious illness, or surgery  Disorders that cause clotting within the kidney blood vessels Infections that directly injure the kidney, such as acute pyelonephritis or  septicemia Pregnancy complications, including  placenta abruption  or  placenta previa Urinary tract blockage Illicit drugs such as cocaine and heroine Medicines including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), certain antibiotics and blood pressure medicines, intravenous contrast (dye), some cancer and HIV drugs Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms of acute kidney failure may include any of the following: Bloody stools Breath odor  and metallic taste in the mouth Bruising easily Changes in mental status  or mood Decreased appetite Decreased sensation , especially in the hands or feet Fatigue  or slow sluggish movements Flank pain  (between the ribs and hips) Hand tremor Heart murmur High blood pressure   Nausea or vomiting, may last for days Nosebleeds Persistent hiccups Prolonged bleeding Seizures Shortness of breath Swelling  due to the body keeping in fluid (may be seen in the legs, ankles, and feet) Urination changes, such as little or no urine,  excessive urination at night , or urination that stops completely  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you. Tests to check how well your kidneys are working include: BUN Creatinine clearance Serum creatinine Serum potassium Urinalysis Other blood tests may be done to find the underlying cause of kidney failure. A kidney or abdominal ultrasound is the preferred test for diagnosing a blockage in the urinary tract. X-ray, CT scan, or MRI of the abdomen can also tell if there is a blockage. Treatment 
 
 Once the cause is found, the goal of treatment is to help your kidneys work again and prevent fluid and waste from building up in your body while they heal. Usually, you will have to stay overnight in the hospital for treatment. The amount of liquid you drink will be limited to the amount of urine you can produce. You will be told what you may and may not eat to reduce the buildup of toxins that the kidneys would normally remove. Your diet may need to be high in  carbohydrates  and low in  protein , salt, and potassium. You may need antibiotics to treat or prevent infection. Water pills (diuretics) may be used to help remove fluid from your body. Medicines will be given through a vein to help control your blood potassium level. You may need  dialysis . This is a treatment that does what healthy kidneys normally do -- rid the body of harmful wastes, extra salt, and water. Dialysis can save your life if your potassium levels are dangerously high. Dialysis will also be used if:  
  Your mental status changes
   
  You develop pericarditis
   
  You retain too much fluid
   
  You cannot remove nitrogen waste products from your body
   Dialysis will most often be short term. In some cases, the kidney damage is so great that dialysis is needed permanently. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if your urine output slows or stops or you have other symptoms of acute kidney failure. Prevention 
 
 To prevent acute kidney failure: Health problems such as high blood pressure or diabetes should be well controlled. Avoid drugs and medicines that can cause kidney injury. Alternative Names 
 
 Kidney failure; Renal failure; Renal failure - acute; ARF; Kidney injury - acute Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Devarajan P. Biomarkers for assessment of renal function during acute kidney injury. In: Alpern RJ, Moe OW, Caplan M, eds.  Seldin and Giebisch's The Kidney . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 75. Molitoris BA. Acute kidney injury. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.  Goldman's Cecil Medicine . 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 120. Sharfuddin AA, Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM, Molitoris BA. Acute kidney injury. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Taal MW, Yu ASL, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 31. Read More 
 
 Acute arterial occlusion - kidney 
 Acute nephritic syndrome 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Alcohol use and safe drinking 
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Burns 
 Crush injury 
 Dehydration 
 Electrolytes 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
 High blood pressure 
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 
 Kidney stones 
 Malignant hypertension 
 Nephrocalcinosis 
 Placenta abruption - definition 
 Placenta previa 
 Renal 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Scleroderma 
 Seizures 
 Septicemia 
 Septic shock 
 Transfusion reaction - hemolytic 
 Tumor 
 
 Review Date 5/10/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: Walead Latif, MD, nephrologist, Clinical Associate Professor, Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Failure 
 Browse the Encyclopedia