
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Analgesic nephropathy involves damage to one or both kidneys caused by overexposure to mixtures of medicines, especially over-the-counter pain medicines (analgesics). Causes 
 
 Analgesic nephropathy involves damage within the internal structures of the kidney. It is caused by long-term use of analgesics (pain medicines), especially over-the-counter (OTC) drugs that contain phenacetin or acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as aspirin or ibuprofen. This condition frequently occurs as a result of self-medicating, often for some type of chronic pain. Risk factors include: Use of OTC analgesics containing more than one active ingredient  Taking 6 or more pills a day for 3 years Chronic headaches, painful menstrual periods, backache, or musculoskeletal pain  Emotional or behavioral changes  History of dependent behaviors including smoking, alcohol use, and excessive use of tranquilizers Symptoms 
 
 There may be no symptoms in the beginning. Over time, as the kidneys are injured by the medicine, symptoms of  kidney disease  will develop and include: Weakness Fatigue Increased urinary frequency or urgency Blood in the urine Flank pain  or back pain Decreased urine output Decreased alertness including drowsiness, confusion, and lethargy Decreased sensation ,  numbness  (especially in the legs) Nausea ,  vomiting Easy  bruising  or  bleeding Swelling  throughout the body Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. During the exam, your provider may find: Your blood pressure is high. When listening with a stethoscope, your heart and lungs have abnormal sounds. You have swelling (edema), especially in the lower legs. Your skin shows premature aging. Tests that may be done include: Complete blood count CT scan of the kidney Intravenous pyelogram  (IVP) Toxicology screen Urinalysis Kidney ultrasound Treatment 
 
 The primary goals of treatment are to prevent further damage of the kidneys and to treat kidney failure. Your provider may tell you to stop taking all suspect painkillers, particularly OTC drugs. To treat kidney failure, your provider may suggest diet changes and fluid restriction. Eventually,  dialysis  or  kidney transplant  may be needed. Counseling may help you develop alternative methods of controlling chronic pain. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 The damage to the kidney may be acute and temporary, or chronic and long term. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result from analgesic nephropathy include: Acute renal failure Chronic kidney failure Interstitial nephritis Renal papillary necrosis  (tissue death) Urinary tract infections ,  chronic  or recurrent High blood pressure Transitional cell  carcinoma  of the kidney or ureter When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have signs of this condition, especially if you have been using painkillers for a long time. Call your provider if you see blood or solid material in your urine, or if the amount of your urine has decreased. Prevention 
 
 Follow your provider's instructions when using medicines, including OTC drugs. Do not take more than the recommended dose without asking your provider. Alternative Names 
 
 Phenacetin nephritis; Nephropathy - analgesic Images 
 
 
 Male urinary system 
 References 
 
 Khan KNM, Hard GC, Alden CL. Kidney. In: Haschek WM, Rousseaux CG, Wallig MA, eds.  Haschek and Rousseaux's Handbook of Toxicologic Pathology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2013:chap 47. Taal MW. Risk factors and chronic kidney disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Yu ASL, Brenner BM, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 21. Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alcohol use disorder 
 Cancer 
 Chronic 
 Chronic kidney disease 
 Cystitis - acute 
 Dehydration 
 Headache 
 Heart failure - overview 
 High blood pressure 
 Incidence 
 Interstitial nephritis 
 Kidney stones 
 Over-the-counter pain relievers 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Protein urine test 
 Renal papillary necrosis 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Pain Relievers 
 Browse the Encyclopedia