
 Chronic kidney disease 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Chronic kidney disease is the slow loss of kidney function over time. The main job of the kidneys is to remove wastes and excess water from the body. Causes 
 
 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) slowly gets worse over months or years. You may not notice any symptoms for some time. The loss of function may be so slow that you do not have symptoms until your kidneys have almost stopped working. The final stage of CKD is called  end-stage renal disease  (ESRD). At this stage, the kidneys are no longer able to remove enough wastes and excess fluids from the body. At this point, you would need dialysis or a  kidney transplant . Diabetes  and  high blood pressure  are the 2 most common causes and account for most cases. Many other diseases and conditions can damage the kidneys, including: Autoimmune disorders (such as  systemic lupus erythematosus  and  scleroderma ) Birth defects of the kidneys (such as  polycystic kidney disease ) Some toxic chemicals Injury to the kidney Kidney stones  and infection Problems with the arteries feeding the kidneys Some medicines, such as pain and cancer drugs Backward flow of urine into the kidneys ( reflux nephropathy ) Other kidney diseases  CKD leads to a buildup of fluid and waste products in the body. This condition affects most body systems and functions, including: High blood pressure Low blood cell count Vitamin D and bone health  Symptoms 
 
 The early symptoms of CKD are the same as for many other illnesses. These symptoms may be the only sign of a problem in the early stages. Symptoms may include: Appetite loss General ill feeling  and  fatigue Headaches Itching ( pruritus)  and dry skin Nausea Weight loss  without trying to lose weight  Symptoms that may occur when kidney function has gotten worse include: Abnormally dark or light skin Bone pain Drowsiness  or problems concentrating or thinking Numbness  or swelling in the hands and feet Muscle twitching  or cramps Breath odor Easy  bruising , or blood in the stool Excessive thirst Frequent hiccups Problems with sexual function Menstrual periods stop (amenorrhea) Shortness of breath Sleep problems Vomiting, often in the morning  Exams and Tests 
 
 Most people will have high blood pressure at all stages of CKD. During an exam, your health care provider may also hear abnormal heart or lung sounds in your chest. You may have signs of nerve damage during a nervous system exam. A  urinalysis  may show  protein  or other changes in your urine. These changes may appear 6 to 10 months or more before symptoms appear. Tests that check how well the kidneys are working include: Creatinine clearance Creatinine  levels Blood urea nitrogen ( BUN )  CKD changes the results of several other tests. You will need to have the following tests as often as every 2 to 3 months when kidney disease gets worse: Albumin Calcium Cholesterol Complete blood count  (CBC) Electrolytes Magnesium Phosphorous Potassium Sodium Other tests that may be done to look for the cause or type of kidney disease include:  CT scan of the abdomen MRI of the abdomen Ultrasound of the abdomen Kidney biopsy Kidney scan Kidney ultrasound  This disease may also change the results of the following tests: Erythropoietin Parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) Bone density test Vitamin D  level  Treatment 
 
 Controlling blood pressure will slow further kidney damage. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are used most often. The goal is to keep blood pressure at or below 130/80 mm Hg.  Making lifestyle changes can help protect the kidneys, and prevent heart disease and stroke, such as: DO NOT smoke. Eat meals that are low in fat and cholesterol. Get regular exercise (talk to your doctor or nurse before starting to exercise). Take drugs to lower your cholesterol, if needed. Keep your blood sugar under control. Avoid eating too much salt or potassium.  Always talk to your kidney specialist before taking any over-the-counter medicine. This includes vitamins, herbs and supplements. Make sure all of the providers you visit know you have CKD. Other treatments may include: Medicines called phosphate binders, to help prevent high phosphorous levels Extra iron in the diet, iron pills, iron given through a vein (intravenous iron) special shots of a medicine called erythropoietin, and blood transfusions to treat anemia Extra calcium and vitamin D (always talk to your provider before taking)  Your provider may have you follow a special  diet for CKD .  Limiting fluids Eating less protein Restricting salt, potassium, phosphorous, and other electrolytes Getting enough calories to prevent weight loss  All people with CKD should be up-to-date on the following vaccinations: Hepatitis A vaccine Hepatitis B vaccine Flu vaccine Pneumonia vaccine (PPV) Support Groups 
 
 Some people benefit from taking part in a  kidney disease support group .
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Many people are not diagnosed with CKD until they have lost most of their kidney function. There is no cure for CKD. If it worsens to  ESD , and how quickly, depends on:  The cause of kidney damage How well you take care of yourself  Kidney failure is the last stage of CKD. This is when your kidneys can no longer support our body's needs. Your provider will discuss  dialysis  with you before you need it. Dialysis removes waste from your blood when your kidneys can no longer do their job. In most cases, you will go to dialysis when you have only 10 to 15% of your kidney function left. Even people who are waiting for a kidney transplant may need dialysis while waiting. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Anemia Bleeding from the stomach or intestines Bone, joint, and muscle pain Changes in blood sugar Damage to nerves of the legs and arms ( peripheral neuropathy ) Dementia Fluid buildup around the lungs ( pleural effusion ) Heart and blood vessel complications High phosphorous levels High potassium levels Hyperparathyroidism Increased risk of infections Liver damage or failure Malnutrition Miscarriages  and  infertility Seizures Swelling ( edema ) Weakening of the bones and increased risk of fractures Prevention 
 
 Treating the condition that is causing the problem may help prevent or delay CKD. People who have diabetes should control their blood sugar and blood pressure levels and should not smoke. Alternative Names 
 
 Kidney failure - chronic; Renal failure - chronic; Chronic renal insufficiency; Chronic kidney failure; Chronic renal failure Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 Kidney - blood and urine flow 
 White nail syndrome 
 References 
 
 Abboud H, Henrich WL. Clinical practice. Stage IV chronic kidney disease.  N Engl J Med . 2010;362(1):56-65. PMID: 20054047  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20054047 . Fogarty DG, Tall MW. A stepped care approach to the management of chronic kidney disease. In: Taal MW, Chertow GM, Marsden PA et al, eds.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 61. Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI). K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines on hypertension and antihypertensive agents in chronic kidney disease.  Am J Kidney Dis . 2004;43(5 Suppl 1):S1-S290. PMID: 15114537  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15114537 . Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Anemia Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease.  Kidney Int Suppl . 2012;2(4):279-335.  www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/KDIGO-Anemia%20GL.pdf . Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Blood Pressure Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease.  Kidney Int Suppl . 2012;2:337-414.  www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/KDIGO_BP_GL.pdf . Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease.  Kidney Int Suppl . 2013;3:1-150.  www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/CKD/KDIGO_2012_CKD_GL.pdf . McCullough PA. Interface between renal disease and cardiovascular disease. In: Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, eds.  Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 88. Tonelli M, Pannu N, Manns B. Oral phosphate binders in patients with kidney failure.  N Engl J Med . 2010;362(14):1312-24. PMID: 20375408  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20375408 . Upadhyay A, Earley A, Haynes SM, Uhlig K. Systematic review: blood pressure target in chronic kidney disease and proteinuria as an effect modifier.  Ann Intern Med . 2011;154(8):541-8. PMID: 21403055  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21403055 . Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Alport syndrome 
 Analgesic nephropathy 
 Anemia 
 Broken bone 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Dementia 
 Diabetes 
 Electrolytes 
 End-stage kidney disease 
 Glomerulonephritis 
 Heart failure - overview 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 High blood pressure 
 High potassium level 
 Immune response 
 Incidence 
 Infertility 
 Itching 
 Kidney stones 
 Metabolism 
 Miscarriage 
 Obstructive uropathy 
 Pericarditis 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Polycystic kidney disease 
 Prerenal azotemia 
 Reflux nephropathy 
 Seizures 
 Ulcers 
 
 Review Date 9/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Charles Silberberg, DO, private practice specializing in nephrology, Affiliated with New York Medical College, Division of Nephrology, Valhalla, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Chronic Kidney Disease 
 Browse the Encyclopedia