
 UPJ obstruction 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction is a blockage at the point where part of the kidney attaches to one of the tubes to the bladder (ureters). This blocks the flow of urine out of the kidney. Causes 
 
 UPJ obstruction mostly occurs in children. It often happens when a baby is still growing in the womb. This is called a congenital condition (present from birth). The blockage is caused when there is a narrowing of area between the ureter and the part of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine can build up and damage the kidney as a result. The condition can also be an abnormal blood vessel over the ureter. In older children and adults, the problem may be due to scar tissue, infection, earlier treatments for a blockage, or kidney stones. UPJ obstruction is the cause of most urinary blockages in children. It is now commonly found before birth with ultrasound tests. In some cases, the condition may not show up until after birth. Symptoms may include an  abdominal mass  or a  urinary tract infection .  Surgery may be needed early in life if the problem is severe. Most of the time, surgery is not needed until later. Some cases do not require surgery at all. Symptoms 
 
 There may not be any symptoms. When symptoms occur, they may include: Back or  flank pain Bloody urine (hematuria) Lump in the abdomen (abdominal mass) Kidney infection Poor growth in infants (failure to thrive) Urinary tract infection, usually with fever Vomiting Exams and Tests 
 
 An ultrasound during pregnancy may show kidney problems in the unborn baby. Tests after birth may include: BUN Creatinine clearance CT scan Electrolytes IVP  - less commonly used CT urogram - scan of both kidneys and ureters with IV contrast Nuclear scan of kidneys Voiding cystourethrogram Ultrasound Treatment 
 
 Surgery to correct the blockage allows urine to flow normally. Most of the time, open (invasive) surgery is performed in infants. Adults may be treated with less-invasive procedures. These procedures involve much smaller surgical cuts than open surgery, and may include: Endoscopic (retrograde) technique does not require a surgical cut on the skin. Instead, a small instrument is placed into the urethra. This allows the surgeon to open the blockage from the inside. Percutaneous (antegrade) technique involves a small surgical cut on the side of the body between the ribs and the hip. Pyeloplasty removes scar tissue from the blocked area and connects the healthy part of the kidney to the healthy ureter.  Laparoscopy has also been used to treat UPJ obstruction in children and adults who have not had success with other procedures. A tube called a  stent  may be placed to drain urine from the kidney until the surgery heals. A nephrostomy tube, which is placed in the side of the body to drain urine, may also be needed for a short time after the surgery. This type of tube may also be used to treat a bad infection before surgery. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Detecting and treating the problem early can help prevent future kidney damage. UPJ obstruction diagnosed before birth or early after birth may actually improve on its own. Most children do well and have no long-term problems. Serious damage may occur in people who are diagnosed later in life.  Long-term outcomes are good with current treatments. Pyeloplasty has the best long-term success. Possible Complications 
 
 If untreated, UPJ obstruction can lead to permanent loss of kidney function ( kidney failure ). Kidney stones or infection may occur in the affected kidney, even after treatment. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call the health care provider if your infant has: Bloody urine Fever A lump in the abdomen Indications of back pain or pain in the flanks (the area towards the sides of the body between the ribs and the pelvis) Alternative Names 
 
 Ureteropelvic junction obstruction; UP junction obstruction; Obstruction of the ureteropelvic junction Images 
 
 
 Kidney anatomy 
 References 
 
 Elder JS. Obstruction of the urinary tract. In: Kliegman RM, Behrman RE, Jenson HB, Stanton BF, eds.  Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics .19th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 534. Frokiaer J, Zeidel ML. Urinary tract obstruction. In: Taal MW, ed.  Brenner and Rector's The Kidney . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 35. Pais VM, Strandhoy JW, Assimos DG. Pathophysiology of urinary tract obstruction. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 41. Singh I, Standhoy JW, Assimos DG. Pathophysiology of urinary tract obstruction. In: Wein AJ, ed.  Campbell-Walsh Urology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:chap 40. Read More 
 
 Abdominal mass 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Fever 
 Hydronephrosis of one kidney 
 Renal 
 Ultrasound pregnancy 
 Urinary tract infection - adults 
 Urine - bloody  
 
 Review Date 6/29/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jennifer Sobol, DO, urologist at the Michigan Institute of Urology, West Bloomfield, MI. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Kidney Diseases 
 Ureteral Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia