
 Dermatomyositis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dermatomyositis is a muscle disease that involves inflammation and a skin rash. It is a type of inflammatory myopathy. Causes 
 
 The cause of dermatomyositis is unknown. Experts think it may be due to a viral infection of the muscles or a problem with the body's immune system. It may also occur in people who have cancer in the abdomen, lung, or other parts of the body. Anyone can develop dermatomyositis. It most often occurs in children age 5 to 15 and adults age 40 to 60. Women develop this condition more often than men. Polymyositis  is a similar condition, but the symptoms do not include a skin rash. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include: Muscle weakness , stiffness, or soreness Problems swallowing Purple color to the upper eyelids Purple-red skin rash Shortness of breath The muscle weakness may come on suddenly or develop slowly over weeks or months. You may have trouble raising your arms over your head, getting up from a sitting position, and climbing stairs. The rash may appear on your face, knuckles, neck, shoulders, upper chest, and back. Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will do a physical exam. Tests may include: Bloods test to check levels of muscle enzymes called creatine phosphokinase and  aldolase Blood tests for autoimmune diseases ECG Electromyography Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Muscle biopsy Skin biopsy Other screening tests for cancer  Treatment 
 
 The disease is treated with anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids. You may also take drugs to suppress the immune system such as methotrexate, azathioprine, and hydroxychloroquine to treat the skin rash. If the condition does not respond to these medicines, other drugs that suppress the immune system may be tried.  When your muscles get stronger, your doctor may tell you to slowly cut back on your doses. Most people with this condition must take a medicine called prednisone for the rest of their lives. If a cancer is causing the condition, the muscle weakness and rash may get better when the tumor is removed. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Symptoms may go away completely in some people, such as children.  The condition may be fatal in adults due to severe muscle weakness, malnutrition,  pneumonia , or lung failure. The major causes of death with this condition are cancer and lung disease. Possible Complications 
 
 Complications may include: Acute renal failure Cancer ( malignancy ) Inflammation of the heart Joint pain Lung disease  When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call your health care provider if you have muscle weakness or other symptoms of this condition. Images 
 
 
 Dermatomyositis, Gottron's papule 
 Dermatomyositis, Gottron's papules on the hand 
 Dermatomyositis, heliotrope eyelids 
 Dermatomyositis on the legs 
 Dermatomyositis, Gottron's papule 
 Paronychia, candidial 
 Dermatomyositis, heliotrope rash on the face 
 References 
 
 Jorizzo JL, Vleugels RA. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 42.  Read More 
 
 Acute kidney failure 
 Joint pain 
 Malignancy 
 Pericarditis 
 Polymyositis - adult 
 Rashes 
 
 Review Date 1/20/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Gordon A. Starkebaum, MD, professor of medicine, division of rheumatology, University of Washington School of Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Myositis 
 Browse the Encyclopedia