
 Dry skin 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Dry skin occurs when your skin loses too much water and oil. Dry skin is common and can affect anyone at any age. The medical term for dry skin is xerosis. Causes 
 
 Dry skin can be caused by: The climate, such as cold, dry winter air or hot, dry desert environments Dry indoor air from heating or cooling systems Bathing too often or too long Some soaps and detergents Skin conditions, such as  eczema  or  psoriasis Diseases, such as diabetes,  underactive thyroid ,  Sjogren syndrome , among others Certain medicines (both topical and oral) Aging, during which skin gets thinner and produces less natural oil Symptoms 
 
 Your skin may get dry, scaly, itchy, and red. You may also have fine cracks on the skin. The problem is usually worse on the arms and legs.  Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will examine your skin. You'll be asked about your health history and skin symptoms. If the provider suspects the dry skin is caused by a health problem that hasn't been diagnosed yet, tests will likely be ordered. Treatment 
 
 Your provider may suggest  home care measures , including: Moisturizers, especially creams or lotions that contain urea and lactic acid Topical steroids for areas that get very inflamed and itchy If your dry skin is from a health problem, you'll likely be treated for it as well. Prevention 
 
 To prevent dry skin: Do not expose your skin to water more often than needed. Use lukewarm bath water. Afterward, pat the skin dry with the towel instead of rubbing. Choose gentle skin cleansers that are free from dyes and perfumes. Alternative Names 
 
 Xerosis; Asteatotic eczema; Eczema craquele Images 
 
 
 Xerosis - close-up 
 References 
 
 Coulson I, Cunningham C. Xerosis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 250. Habif TP. Atopic dermatitis. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 5. 
 Review Date 8/20/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia