
 
 
 
 
 Dyshidrotic eczema 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 
 
 
 
 
          				Dyshidrotic eczema is a condition in which small blisters develop on the hands and feet. The blisters are often itchy. Eczema ( atopic dermatitis ) is a long-term (chronic) skin disorder that involves scaly and itchy rashes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Causes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The cause is unknown. The condition seems to appear during certain times of the year. You are more likely to develop dyshidrotic eczema when: 
 
 You are under stress 
 You have allergies, such as hay fever 
 Your hands are often in water or moist 
 You work with cement or do other work that exposes your hands to chromium, cobalt, or nickel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Small fluid-filled  blisters  called vesicles appear on the fingers, hands, and feet. They are most common along the edges of the fingers, toes, palms, and soles. These blisters can be very itchy. They also cause scaly patches of skin that flake or get red, cracked, and painful. Scratching leads to skin changes and skin thickening. Large blisters may cause pain or can get infected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exams and Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your doctor may be able to diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. A  skin biopsy  may be needed to rule out other causes, such as a fungal infection or psoriasis. If your doctor thinks the condition may be due to an allergic reaction, allergy testing (patch testing) may be done. 
 
 
 
  Continue Reading      
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SKIN CARE AT HOME Keep the skin moist by lubricating or moisturizing the skin. Use ointments (such as petroleum jelly), creams, or lotions. Moisturizers: 
 
 Should be free of alcohol, scents, dyes, fragrances, or other chemicals. 
 Work best when they're applied to skin that is wet or damp. After washing or bathing, pat the skin dry and then apply the moisturizer right away. 
 May be used at different times of the day. For the most part, you can apply these substances as often as you need to keep your skin soft. 
 
 MEDICINES Medicines that help relieve itching can be bought without a prescription. 
 
 Take an anti-itch medicine before bed if you scratch in your sleep. 
 Some antihistamines cause little or no sleepiness. These include fexofenadine (Allegra), loratadine (Claritin, Alavert), cetirizine (Zyrtec) 
 Others can make you sleepy, including diphenhydramine (Benadryl). 
 
 Your doctor may prescribe topical medicines. These are ointments or creams that are applied to the skin. Types include: 
 
 Corticosteroids, which calm swollen or inflamed skin 
 Immunomodulators, which help keep the immune system from reacting too strongly 
 
 Follow instructions on how to apply these medicines. Do not apply more than you're supposed to use. If symptoms are severe, you may need other treatments, such as: 
 
 Corticosteroid pills 
 Corticosteroid shots 
 Coal tar preparations 
 Phototherapy (ultraviolet light therapy) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dyshidrotic eczema usually goes away without problems, but symptoms may come back. Excess scratching may lead to thick, irritated skin. This makes the problem harder to treat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Call your health care provider if you have: 
 
 Signs of infection such as tenderness, redness, warmth, or fever 
 A rash that does not go away with simple home treatments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alternative Names 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dyshidrosis; Pompholyx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burdick AE, Camach ID. Pompholyx. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 190. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM. Atopic dermatitis, eczema, and noninfectious immunodeficiency disorders. In: James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, eds.  Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Review Date 7/23/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eczema 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Rashes 
 Read more       
   
 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Read more       
   
 
