
 Folliculitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Folliculitis is inflammation of one or more hair follicles. It can occur anywhere on the skin. Causes 
 
 Folliculitis starts when hair follicles are damaged or when the follicle is blocked. This may occur from rubbing against clothing or shaving, for example. Most of the time, the damaged follicles become infected with  Staphylococcus  (staph) bacteria. Barber's itch is a staph infection of the hair follicles in the beard area, usually the upper lip. Shaving makes it worse. Tinea barbae is similar to barber's itch, but the infection is caused by a fungus. Pseudofolliculitis barbae is a disorder that occurs mainly in black men. If curly beard hairs are cut too short, they may curve back into the skin and cause inflammation. Symptoms 
 
 Common symptoms include a  rash , itching, and  pimples  or  pustules  near a hair follicle in the neck, groin, or genital area. The pimples may crust over. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Lab tests may show which bacteria or fungus is causing the infection. Treatment 
 
 Hot, moist compresses may help drain the affected follicles.  Treatment may include antibiotics applied to the skin or taken by mouth, or an antifungal medicine. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Folliculitis usually responds well to treatment, but it may come back. Possible Complications 
 
 Folliculitis may return or spread to other body areas.  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Apply home treatment and call your health care provider if your symptoms: Come back often Get worse Last longer than 2 or 3 days Prevention 
 
 To prevent further damage to the hair follicles and infection: Reduce friction from clothing. Avoid shaving the area, if possible (if shaving is necessary, use a clean, new razor blade or an electric razor each time). Keep the area clean. Avoid contaminated clothing and washcloths.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pseudofolliculitis barbae; Tinea barbae; Barber's itch Images 
 
 
 Folliculitis, decalvans on the scalp 
 Folliculitis on the leg 
 References 
 
 Habif TM. Bacterial infections. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2009:chap 9. Habif TM. Principles of diagnosis and anatomy. In: Habif TP, ed.  Clinical Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2009:chap 1. McMichael A, Curtis AR, Guzman-Sanchez D, Kelly AP. Folliculitis and other follicular disorders. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2012:chap 38. Pasternack MS, Swartz MN. Cellulitis, necrotizing faciitis, and subcutaneous tissue infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 95. 
 Review Date 11/2/2014 
 
 
 Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Medical Director and Director of Didactic Curriculum, MEDEX Northwest Division of Physician Assistant Studies, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Hair Problems 
 Browse the Encyclopedia