
 Hot tub folliculitis 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Hot tub  folliculitis  is an infection of the skin around the lower part of the hair shaft (hair follicles). It occurs when you come into contact with certain bacteria that live in warm and wet areas. Causes 
 
 Hot tub folliculitis is caused by  Pseudomonas aeruginosa , a bacteria that survives in hot tubs, especially tubs made of wood.  Symptoms 
 
 The first symptom of hot tub folliculitis is an itchy, bumpy, and red rash. Symptoms can appear from several hours to 2 days after contact with the bacteria. The  rash  may: Turn into dark red tender  nodules Have bumps that fill with pus Look like acne Be thicker under swimsuit areas where the water was in contact with the skin for longer  Other people who used the hot tub may have the same rash. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can often make this diagnosis based on looking at the rash and knowing that you have been in a hot tub. Testing is usually not needed. Treatment 
 
 Treatment may not be needed. The mild form of the disease often clears on its own. Anti-itch medicines may be used to ease discomfort. In severe cases, your provider may prescribe an antibiotic. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 This condition usually clears without scarring. The problem may come back if you use the hot tub again before it has been cleaned. Possible Complications 
 
 In rare cases, a collection of pus ( abscess ) may form. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms of hot tub folliculitis. Prevention 
 
 Controlling the acid levels and chlorine content of the hot tub may help prevent the problem. Images 
 
 
 Hair follicle anatomy 
 References 
 
 D'Agata E.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  and other  Pseudomonas  species. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.  Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Updated Edition . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:chap 221. Lacuesta MPM, Phelps RG. Folliculitis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014:chap 83. Read More 
 
 Abscess 
 Folliculitis 
 Itching 
 Rashes 
 Skin nodules 
 
 Review Date 10/24/2016 
 
 
 Updated by: David L. Swanson, MD, Vice Chair of Medical Dermatology, Associate Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Medical School, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.       
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Hair Problems 
 Rashes 
 Browse the Encyclopedia