
 Ichthyosis vulgaris 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Ichthyosis vulgaris is a skin disorder passed down through families that leads to dry, scaly skin. Causes 
 
 Ichthyosis vulgaris is one of the most common of the inherited skin disorders. It may begin in early childhood. The condition is inherited in an  autosomal dominant  pattern. That means you only need to get the abnormal gene from one parent in order to inherit the disease. The condition is often more noticeable in the winter. It may occur along with  atopic dermatitis , asthma, keratosis pilaris (small bumps on the back of the arms and legs), or other skin disorders. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Dry skin , severe Scaly skin ( scales ) Possible skin thickening Mild itching of the skin  The dry, scaly skin is usually most severe on the legs. But it can also involve the arms, hands, and middle of the body. People with this condition may also have many fine lines on the palm of the hand. Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can usually diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Tests may be needed to rule out other possible causes of dry, scaly skin. Your provider will ask if you have a family history of similar skin dryness. A  skin biopsy  may be performed. Treatment 
 
 Your provider will recommend using heavy-duty moisturizers. Creams and ointments work better than lotions. Apply these to moist skin immediately after bathing. You should use mild, non-drying soaps.  Your provider may tell you to use hydrating-moisturizing creams that contain keratolytic chemicals such as lactic acid, salicylic acid, and urea. These chemicals help skin shed normally while retaining moisture. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Ichthyosis vulgaris can be bothersome, but it rarely affects your overall health. The condition usually disappears during adulthood, but may return years later. Possible Complications 
 
 A bacterial skin infection may develop if scratching causes openings in the skin. When to Contact a Medical Professional  
 
 Call for an appointment with your health care provider if: Symptoms continue despite treatment Symptoms get worse Skin lesions spread New symptoms develop  Alternative Names 
 
 Common ichthyosis; Fish scale disease Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Newsham J, Farquharson NR, Clayton TH. Ichthyoses. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 107. Patterson JW. Disorders of epidermal maturation and kertinization. In: Patterson JW, ed.  Weedon's Skin Pathology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2015:chap 9. Read More 
 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia