
 Nummular eczema 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Nummular eczema is a dermatitis (eczema) in which itchy, coin-shaped spots or patches appear on the skin. The word nummular is Latin for "resembling coins." Causes 
 
 The cause of nummular eczema is unknown. But there usually is a personal or family history of: Allergies Asthma Atopic dermatitis Things that can make the condition worse, include: Dry skin Environmental irritants Stress Temperature changes  Symptoms 
 
  Symptoms may include any of the following: Coin-shaped skin lesions that are dry and scaly, and appear on the arms and legs
  Lesions may spread to middle of body Lesions may ooze and become crusty Itching Scaly or raw skin Skin redness or inflammation Exams and Tests 
 
 Your health care provider can usually diagnose this condition by looking at your skin and asking about your family's medical history. A  skin biopsy  may be needed to rule out other similar conditions. Allergy testing may be done. Treatment 
 
 Avoid triggers that can make your symptoms worse, such as wool, lanolin, and certain foods. Do not take frequent baths. Excess bathing and soap can cause  dry skin , which often makes the condition worse. Also, avoid hot water while taking a bath or shower. Your doctor may recommend skin lotion that repairs the barrier of the skin, special skin cleansers that are mild, or moist bandages to soothe scaly, dry, or healing areas. Antihistamines may be prescribed to relieve itching. Persons with severe symptoms may be prescribed ointments that contain tar, corticosteroids, or other medicines that lower the immune system. In very severe cases, more powerful medicines called steroids are prescribed. These may need to be applied to the skin or taken by mouth. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Nummular eczema is a long-term (chronic) condition. Medical treatment and avoiding irritants can help reduce symptoms. Possible Complications 
 
 A  secondary infection  of the skin may develop. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider if you have symptoms of this condition. Also call for an appointment if: Symptoms continue despite treatment You have signs of infection (such as  fever , redness, or pain)  Prevention 
 
 There is no known way to prevent the disorder. Avoid any triggers that make your symptoms worse. Keep your skin moist and use gentle cleansers. Avoid things that irritate the skin. Alternative Names 
 
 Eczema - discoid; Nummular dermatitis Images 
 
 
 Skin layers 
 References 
 
 Coulson I. Discoid eczema. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 59. Reider N, Fritsch PO. Other eczematous eruptions. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds.  Dermatology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 13. Read More 
 
 Allergies - overview 
 Atopic dermatitis 
 Chronic 
 Secondary infections 
 Stress and your health 
 
 Review Date 4/14/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Kevin Berman, MD, PhD, Atlanta Center for Dermatologic Disease, Atlanta, GA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Eczema 
 Browse the Encyclopedia