
 Pilonidal cyst resection 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 A pilonidal cyst is a pocket that forms around a hair follicle in the crease between the buttocks. The area may look like a small pit or pore in the skin that contains a dark spot or hair. Sometimes the cyst can become infected and this is called a pilonidal  abscess . Description 
 
 An infected pilonidal cyst or abscess requires surgical drainage. It will not heal with antibiotic medicines. If you continue to have infections, the pilonidal cyst can be removed. There are several types of surgery: Incision and drainage:  This is the most common treatment for an infected cyst. It is a simple procedure done in the doctor's office. Local anesthesia is used to numb the skin. A cut is made in the cyst to drain fluid and pus. The hole is packed with gauze and left open. Afterward, it can take up to 4 weeks for the cyst to heal. The gauze has to be changed often during this time.  Pilonidal cystectomy:  If you keep having problems with a pilonidal cyst, it can be removed surgically. This procedure is done as an outpatient procedure, so you will not need to spend the night in the hospital. You may be given medicine (general anesthesia) that keeps you asleep and pain-free. Or, you may be given medicine (regional anesthesia) that numbs you from the waist down. In rare cases, you may only be given local numbing medicine. A cut is made to remove the skin with the pores and the underlying tissue with the hair follicles. Depending on how much tissue is removed, the area may or may not be packed with gauze. Sometimes a tube is placed to drain fluid that collects after surgery. The tube is removed at a later time when the fluid stops draining.  It may be hard to remove the entire cyst, so there is a chance that it will come back. Why the Procedure is Performed 
 
 Surgery is needed to drain and remove a pilonidal cyst that does not heal. Your doctor may recommend this procedure if you have pilonidal disease that is causing pain or infection. A pilonidal cyst that is not causing symptoms does not need treatment.  Non-surgical treatment may be used if the area is not infected: Shaving or laser removal of hair around the cyst Injection of surgical glue into the cyst  Risks 
 
 Pilonidal cyst resection is generally safe. Ask your doctor about these complications: Bleeding Infection Taking a long time for the area to heal Having the pilonidal cyst come back  Before the Procedure 
 
 Meet with your doctor to make sure medical problems, such as  diabetes ,  high blood pressure , and heart or lung problems are in good control. Tell your health care provider: What medicines, vitamins, and other supplements you are taking, even ones you bought without a prescription. If you are or could be pregnant. If you have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day. If you are a smoker, stop smoking several weeks before the surgery. Your provider can help. You may be asked to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), vitamin E, clopidogrel (Plavix), warfarin (Coumadin), and any other drugs like these. Ask your doctor which medicines you should take on the day of your surgery.  After the Procedure 
 
 After the procedure: You can go home after the procedure The wound will be covered with a bandage You will get pain medicines It is very important to keep the area around the wound clean Your health care provider will show you how to care for your wound After it heals, shaving the hair in the wound area may help prevent pilonidal disease from coming back  Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 Pilonidal cysts come back in about half of the people who have surgery the first time. Even after a second surgery, it may come back.  Alternative Names 
 
 Pilonidal abscess; Pilonidal dimple; Pilonidal disease; Pilonidal cyst; Pilonidal sinus References 
 
 Ford DH, Bailey HR. Pilonidal disease. In: Yeo CJ, ed.  Shackelford's Surgery of the Alimentary Tract . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013;chap 149.  Steele SR, Perry WB, Mills S, Buie WD, Standards Practice Task Force of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Practice parameters for the management of pilonidal disease.  Dis Colon Rectum . 2013;56:1021-7. PMID: 23929010  www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23929010 .  Sternberg JA. The management of pilonidal disease. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.  Current Surgical Therapy . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014;293-301. 
 Review Date 4/5/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, general surgery practice specializing in breast cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Abscess 
 Tailbone Disorders 
 Browse the Encyclopedia