
 Scalded skin syndrome 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Scalded skin syndrome is a skin infection caused by bacteria in which the skin becomes damaged and sheds. Causes 
 
 Scalded skin syndrome (SSS) is caused by infection with certain strains of  Staphylococcus  bacteria. The bacteria produce a toxin that causes the skin damage. The damage creates blisters, as if the skin were scalded. These blisters can occur;at areas of the skin away from the initial site. SSS is found most commonly in infants and children under the age of 5. Symptoms 
 
 Symptoms may include any of the following: Blisters Fever Large areas of skin peel or fall away (exfoliation or desquamation) Painful skin Redness of the skin ( erythema ), which spreads to cover most of the body Skin slips off with gentle pressure, leaving wet red areas ( Nikolsky sign ) Exams and Tests 
 
 The health care provider will perform a physical exam and look at the skin. The exam may show that the skin slips off when it is rubbed (positive Nikolsky sign). Tests may include: Complete blood count ( CBC ) Cultures of the  skin ,  throat and nose , and  blood Electrolyte  test Skin biopsy  (in rare cases)  Treatment 
 
 Antibiotics are given by mouth or through a vein (intravenously; IV) to help fight the infection. IV fluids are also given to prevent dehydration. Much of the body's fluid is lost through open skin.  Moist compresses to the skin may improve comfort. You can apply a moisturizing ointment to keep the skin moist. Healing begins about 10 days after treatment. Outlook (Prognosis) 
 
 A full recovery is expected.  Possible Complications 
 
 Complications that may result include: Abnormal level of fluids in the body causing  dehydration  or  electrolyte  imbalance Poor temperature control (in young infants) Severe bloodstream infection ( septicemia ) Spread to deeper skin infection ( cellulitis )  When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Call your provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of this disorder. Prevention 
 
 The disorder may not be preventable. Treating any staphylococcus infection quickly can help. Alternative Names 
 
 Ritter disease; Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSS) References 
 
 Koch D, Taibjee SM. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Berth-Jones J, Coulson I, eds.  Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014:chap 223. Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Bacterial, mycobacterial, and protozoal infections of the skin. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.  Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology . 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Cellulitis 
 Fever 
 Septicemia 
 Skin blushing/flushing 
 
 Review Date 12/10/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Infections 
 Staphylococcal Infections 
 Browse the Encyclopedia