
 Skin discoloration - bluish 
 
 
 
 To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript. 
 Cyanosis is a bluish color to the skin or mucous membrane that is usually due to a lack of oxygen in the blood. Considerations 
 
 Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues. Most of the time, nearly all red blood cells in the arteries carry a full supply of oxygen. These blood cells are bright red and the skin is pinkish or red. Blood that has lost its oxygen is dark bluish-red. People whose blood is low in oxygen tend to have a bluish color to their skin. This condition is called cyanosis. Depending on the cause, cyanosis may develop suddenly, along with shortness of breath and other symptoms. Cyanosis that is caused by long-term heart or lung problems may develop slowly. Symptoms may be present, but are often not severe. When the oxygen level has dropped only a small amount, cyanosis may be hard to detect. In dark-skinned people, cyanosis may be easier to see in the mucous membranes (lips, gums, around the eyes) and nails. Causes 
 
 Cyanosis that is seen in only one part of the body may be due to: A blood clot that blocks the blood supply to a leg, foot, hand, or arm Raynaud phenomenon  
 LACK OF OXYGEN IN THE BLOOD 
  Most cyanosis occurs because of a lack of oxygen in the blood. This can be caused by the following problems. Problems with the lungs: Blood clot in the arteries of the lungs ( pulmonary embolism ) Drowning or near-drowning High altitude Infection in the smallest air passages in the lungs of children, called  bronchiolitis Long-term lung problems that become more severe, such as  COPD ,  asthma , and  interstitial lung disease Pneumonia  (severe)  Problems with the airways leading to the lungs: Breath-holding Choking on something stuck in the airways Croup Epiglottitis Problems with the heart: Heart defects that are present at birth (congenital) Heart failure Heart stops working (cardiac arrest)  Other problems: Drug overdose (narcotics, benzodiazepines, sedatives) Exposure to cold air or water Seizure that lasts a long time Toxins such as cyanide  Home Care 
 
 For cyanosis caused by exposure to cold or Raynaud phenomenon, dress warmly when going outside or stay in a well-heated room. When to Contact a Medical Professional 
 
 Bluish skin (cyanosis) can be a sign of many serious medical problems. Call or visit your health care provider. For adults, call your doctor or 911 if you have bluish skin and any of the following: You cannot get a deep breath or your breathing is getting harder, or faster. Need to lean forward when sitting to breathe. Are using muscles around the ribs to get enough air. Have chest pain. Are having headaches more often than usual. Feel sleepy or confused. Have a fever. Are coughing up dark mucus.  For children, call the doctor or 911 if your child has bluish skin and any of the following: Hard time breathing Chest muscles moving in with each breath Breathing faster than 50 to 60 breaths per minute (when not crying) Making a grunting noise Sitting with shoulders hunched over Is very tired Is not moving around much Has a limp or floppy body Nostrils are flaring out when breathing Does not feel like eating Is irritable Has trouble sleeping  What to Expect at Your Office Visit 
 
 Your provider will perform a physical examination. This will include listening to your breathing and heart sounds. In emergency situations (such as  shock ), you will be stabilized first. The provider will ask about your symptoms. Questions may include: When did the bluish skin develop? Did it come on slowly or suddenly? Is your body blue all over? How about your lips or nailbeds? Have you been exposed to cold or gone to a high altitude? Do you have trouble  breathing ? Do you have a cough or chest pain? Do you have  ankle, foot, or leg swelling ?  Tests that may be ordered include: Arterial blood gas analysis Blood oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry Chest x-ray Chest CT scan Complete blood count  (CBC) ECG Echocardiogram  (ultrasound of the heart)  The treatment you receive depends on the cause of cyanosis. For example, you may receive oxygen for shortness of breath. Alternative Names 
 
 Lips - bluish; Fingernails - bluish; Cyanosis; Bluish lips and fingernails; Bluish skin Images 
 
 
 Cyanosis of the nail bed 
 References 
 
 Fernandez-Frackelton M. Cyanosis. In: Marx JA, Hockberger RS, Walls RM, et al, eds.  Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice . 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Mosby; 2014:chap 14. Read More 
 
 Cyanotic heart disease 
 Hemoglobin 
 Methemoglobinemia 
 Raynaud phenomenon 
 
 Review Date 6/22/2015 
 
 
 Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
 Related MedlinePlus Health Topics 
 
 Skin Conditions 
 Browse the Encyclopedia